---
Pr-id: Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 36
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Preface
Article-status: accepted
Author: Tripta Chandola
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

# Preface: For Bitiya 

> Things last longer than men. Who can say whether the story ends here;
> who can say they will never meet again. – J.L. Borges, The Encounter.

In a flat city, or flattened by the many who walk it, the hilltop of an
illusion allowed for a sense of height and depth. It was a clear, early
winter morning, and I was looking at my crisp best, dressed as the jaded
travelers are: collar-down coat, black of course, a roll-on case with no
untidy edges and a distant look. However I was not yet at the airport.
It was not only the look that was distant, but the look that had
rendered a distance to everything immediate – as is a tactic with those
who spend hours in the in-between spaces (of the airports), dreaming (or
obversely, dreading) of faraway lands.

The reverie was broken by the announcement of a white van with blaring
red lights. I was starkly reminded of where I was; blame it on the
cinematographer’s abuse, I had imagined a more dramatic setting.

I was at the entrance of the Safdarjung Mortuary awaiting Bitiya to
arrive. We had serious business of the dead for the living to resolve.
She was always on her way, never on time. And I found myself distracted
from the matters at hand to one hot, summer afternoon years back.

In those times I was an earnest researcher in search of the subjects in
the lanes of Govindpuri. I was led into a tiny room, thick with
darkness. It was a relief, even though it took me a couple of minutes to
find my bearings and the faces of the people present. A huge wooden bed
was the only furniture occupying most of the space in this six by four
feet room. On it lay a young woman about whom the first thing I remember
is her hair; they were spread out like sleeping rivers. The presence did
not need any announcement. Baby, my companion, introduced me to an older
woman who was squatting at one end of the bed. She was the lying young
woman's mother, Salma. Between the two of them, mostly the lying woman,
there was very little space on the bed to offer me a seat. She was
nudged. Her stillness was absolute. Baby in a high pitched tone informed
her that I was there to interview people about their lives; that I was
interested in hearing it all. A spark struck. She turned around, though
still lying, shifting towards the wall to make space for me, reached for
my hand, sat me next to her, and without any courtesies of formal
introductions or establishing the intent of my so-said questioning, set
out on her soliloquy; my hand merely a prop. For the next hour, and then
some, she narrated at length, at once despairing and delighted, about
her affair with her lover, Bitiya, of last seven years with whom she
recently had yet another altercation.

Her performance was relentless. The interruptions of tea being made in
one corner of the room, served and partaken; first, Baby and then Salma
excusing themselves on account of reaching their respective place of
work as domestic workers, did not deter her. Before leaving, both, Baby
and Salma, had tried to intervene and disrupt the performance in which
they reckoned I was entrapped as an unwilling audience. In continuing to
allow her to hold my hand I assured the two departing women that no
coercion was being exercised; they had eventually left, slightly
bemused. And thus it was the lying young woman, who had by now gathered
herself in a squat, her spread out hair and sparkling eyes.

In spite of the agonies of her affair, every once so often she would
break into a childlike enthusiasm about the accessories I was carrying:
my bag, the pouch in which I carried my rolling tobacco and the perfect
cigarette I was rolling. Half an hour later I had to bid her farewell to
keep another appointment. It finally dawned upon her that no formal
introductions had been made: She introduced herself, Bitiya. And asked
the intent of my visits. I told her. Before I departed she once again
reached out to my hand and sought a promise: “You are writing the story
of this place, right? Will you write about my love story? I want the
world to know that no one can love like me”. I told her there were many
other stories I had to consider as well, but of course I will. She left
me standing at her porch, her hair swaying, loudly announcing after me
that I should make my next visit soon; she hadn't told me anything yet.

That afternoon was almost a decade back. But in the now and here, Bitiya
had arrived, effervescent, her brown-eyes sparkling ahead of her and
slight jump in her walk. Considering the matter at hand, I wanted to
reach out to her and seek apology for not having accompanied her here
when she had to come the first time: two-years back in the middle of the
night and eight-months pregnant. But together we had seen, felt and
grown enough to know that such courtesies were not required between us.
Of course notwithstanding the situation and the setting, Bitiya remarked
on the tardiness of my roll-on case, which she later did take to pack to
her satisfaction.

The first time, in the middle of the night, Bitiya was accompanying
Dimpy’s – the love of her life - brutally stabbed dead-body to the
morgue. Having heard her wail on the phone, I had not the courage to be
there for her then. But in the now and here, we were at the office which
maintained the records to claim what Bitiya reckoned was rightfully
hers: the dead-man’s name as hers.

As the tales of listening into the others, but not the task of it, folds
onto itself, Bitiya and I have a web of the etching of the lanes of the
Govindpuri slums, where we laughed, loved, fought, cried, mourned and
steadfastly held on to each other, bearing its testimonies on ourselves,
poetics and politics. We also have a seven-year old between us, Myshkin,
who is putting us to the task of compelling and challenging the practice
of our politics, a battle which we had reckoned we had already won. He
is our anchor, ensuring that for no seductions and sirens shall we let
our politics and poetics of our practice be compromised.

बितिया येह तेरे लिये: \[Bitiya, this is for you\]

*तुम मेरी नग्मा,*

*कोना और आगर हो,*

*सन्न्न्तत्, शोर और सेहर *

*Postscript: *

As I shared these recollections with Bitiya, she claimed the book by
demanding that an inscription of her own to be inserted for Dimpy, the
love of her life, ‘*I miss you, Dimpy’.*
