---
Pr-id: Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 36
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: 3. An Obscene Calling
Article-status: accepted
Author: Tripta Chandola
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 3. An ‘Obscene’ Calling Emotionality in/of Marginalized Spaces: A Listening of/into ‘Abusive’ Women in Govindpuri 

## The Calling

And thus does Zizek expound on the ‘traumatic dimension of voice’ by
focusing on *The Exorcist* in *The Perverts’ Guide to Cinema*:

>Voice is not an organic part of the human body. It is coming from some where in between your body. Whenever we talk to another person there is always this minimum of ventriloquist affect, as if some foreign power took possession. Remember (speaking over the clip from the film, *The Exorcist*, where the girl is possessed) that at the beginning of the
film this was a beautiful, young girl. How did she become a monster  that we see? By being possessed, but who possessed her? A voice.[^3_1]

This is an obscene essay. It deals with obscenity as a particular and
peculiar ‘traumatic dimension of voice’ performed by women onto other
women in the traumatized space of the Govindpuri slums. However, it is
not only its subject matter that lends this essay its character. It is
also in the liberties it takes to obscenely identify in these
performances the potential to displace patriarchal-spatial hierarchies;
an exhibitionist display of emotionality; and a well-articulated desire
for love, not only as an esoteric experience but also a condensed
social, sexual reality. Since at the core of every trauma lies (unfolds)
a violent social, moral, physical event, the ruminations in this chapter
constantly concern themselves with identifying these sites of violence
the obscene performances not only claim, but also create, on its self
and on the others.

Women spewing sexually explicit and violent abuses (in this context, in
Hindi), toward the female body, which are traditionally reckoned to be
the classic masculine expression to reiterate the hierarchy, as the
particular instance of obscene ‘traumatic dimension of voice’, is the
focus of this essay. Whilst the chapter acknowledges the broader
materiality of gendered obscene-sonic exchange in the slums, this essay
focuses on the particular and peculiar economy of this exchange when the
obscenities are not only claimed by but are also exclusively directed at
women by other women. By implicating themselves in the violence directed
toward the ‘real’ and ‘imagined’ body of the self (and thus taking
charge of that violence, at least rhetorically), the women create a
disruptive and volatile space where gendered spaces, roles, and
identities necessitate reframing. The evocation of these abuses, I
argue, is a strategic act of subversion and circumvention of the
patriarchal hierarchies. The landscape of patriarchal hierarchies is not
an exclusive domain of masculine presence(s) and reiterations; and more
often than not, it is the performance of masculinities—by both men and
women—which accord it its particular characteristic. In that sense,
while this essay acknowledges that the cartographic, emotional and
social imaginations of the patriarchal landscapes are devised by the
dominant sensibilities, women often assume a masculine persona to
institute these imaginations, especially when the exchange does not
involve gendered interactions but unfolds in an apparently gender
‘neutral’ setting exclusively between women.

It is within this framing that the evocations—obscenities by women
directed at women—are affectively employed toward several agendas:
social, cultural, spatial and political. However, in this chapter I
explore the evocation of these abuses to map the cartographic and
cathartic experience and experiencing of love in, and within, the slums
of Govindpuri (hereafter ‘GP’). The essay then dwells upon the agency
and extent of strategy available to the marginalized—here, women in an
essentially patriarchal setting, and slums within the broader
materiality of the city—to affect the designed subversion and
circumvention to complicate the reckoning of the self deflected through
the prism of sonic performances, emotions, identity and violence. In
that, this essay, even though romantically inclined, refuses to
romanticize violence by engaging with its perverse everydayness. In the
discussions that follow, it is a matter of deliberation to not highlight
the particular social and political considerations and consequences of
voice and sonic performativity as agency in the given context. The
intent is not to collapse these distinct categories. Instead it aims to
unfold these obscene evocations as a complex and nuanced negotiation
between the two to highlight the ruptures, continuations and
displacements between different kinds of sonic permissibility available
to a certain group and the resounding impact it can have.

Baby and Bitiya, two formidable women in GP, who not only allowed me to
experience their experiencing of love within this schematic, but who
also agreed to have their narratives exploited for broader
extrapolations, are the punctuations—not as objectified entities, but as
necessary instruments (in all their sensuousness)—carrying these
explorations further. I, as a bearer of the feminine form, and an
interlocutor-in-charge, insert myself in the text, not with a
self-indulgent agenda, but to highlight the anxieties of the encounter
of the obscene sorts, across myriad considerations, especially of class
distinctions.

## Obscenely, Yours

Beginning at the basics: the self, before I venture into the self of the
other. I grew up in a setting reeking of colonial and real hangovers.
Both my parents were in the Indian army; my father was part of the
elite, combative commando forces and my mother a dentist in its medical
forces. Over the weekends we had croquet games, long-drawn bridge games
and lots of gin. We, the children, did not partake in the latter though.
We grew up with smatterings of grammatically incorrect English, and our
parents—mostly, fathers—exclaiming, *bloody hell*, *God damn you*, and
*bastard*. That was the extent of obscene exclamations I grew up with. I
never heard them swear in Hindi, but as I grew older, I got to know of
abuses in Hindi: *maader-chod* (mother-fucker), *behen-chod*
(sister-fucker), *chutiya* (cunt). However, it was only when I had left
the security of parental nesting, acquired half-baked degrees, romanced
with revolutionary ideas, drank enough dark rum and reckoned myself to
be truly liberal that I started using these expletives as punctuations
as the men around us did. I was not alone. I was part of a cohort who
had grown up with socialist realities and leftist ambitions while
assuming neo-liberal sensibilities. We, of course, like them (the men)
did not mean them literally; the violence was truly displaced, or so we
thought. The beginning was hesitant though, but once realizing the
currency the utterance of these expletives carried in sustaining a moral
and social shock, it was incorporated as part of everyday emotional and
intellectual expression.

Men who found it deplorable did not see us beyond the main door. The
exchange—social, intellectual and sexual—was thus mediated by a highly
sexualized, violent vocabulary. This exchange, in all its liberal
pretensions, not only displaced the body and site of the violence, but
violence itself. However, all said and done, we never lost our
moral-virginal hymens. The liminal space we had managed to carve out
through these obscene performances allowed us to transgress across
conflicting social-moral landscapes. I had reckoned that I was thus
truly liberated from middle-class sexual mores and moral prejudices.
However, when entering yet another liminal space, I was compelled to
renegotiate the social-sexual-moral economies I was convinced I had
claimed.

In 2004, I was appointed to assist Dr. Jo Tacchi in a Department for
International Development (DFID) funded research on ‘Role of Information
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in Poverty Alleviation’. The slums
of Govindpuri were one of the identified research sites. Until then,
even though I had lived in Delhi for almost a decade, my experience of
and exposure to the slums in Delhi was through a primarily middle-class,
educated, urban lens. This implied that, while I was aware of the
rhetoric of displacement and resettlement vis-à-vis the slums in popular
mainstream media and academic discourse, I had never experienced the
space first hand. Though conscious of the discursive practices that
othered the slums and slum-dwellers, I was still reluctant and hesitant
when it came to setting my terms of engagement, primarily because of my
limited knowledge of the space. The narratives highlighting the everyday
violence, displacement and marginalization of the slums also—often,
subconsciously and insidiously (as fine subtext)—included testimonies of
the social, moral and sexual conducts in these spaces. These, the
narratives emphasized, were different, and this difference lay in the
distance from the middle-class-ness of these practices.

And thus I ventured into the slums of GP, hesitant and reclaiming the
middle-class-ness I had spent years to shed off. Or at least I reckoned.
At the most fundamental level, this was obvious in the deliberation of
attire I chose to present myself in the slums. It was not the
Westernized appearance I usually donned — T-shirt and jeans — but a more
staid one reflective of the ‘indigenous’
culture — *salwaar-kurtas*[^3_2] — with, of course, a perfectly draped
*dupatta.*[^3_3] However the deception went deeper and further: a heavy
smoker, I did not dare light up in GP; a drinker of some merit, I
refused to claim this indulgence; romantically and sexually adventurous,
I definitely did not acknowledge these encounters, or even their
possibilities. However, pertinent to the context of this essay, the most
dramatic shift was in the presentation and performance of my sonic self
in the space of the slums. The language of communication and
conversation in GP was Hindi — that in itself was a shift, as I inhabited
spaces where Indian-English was the de facto language. Moreover, the
iteration of Hindi I chose as my sonic identity within the materiality
of GP was chaste and definitely devoid of the obscenities, which
otherwise were part of my everyday vocabulary.

It has been ten years since those early days of hesitant, deceptive
encounters in GP. Following the DFID research project, I undertook to
pursue my doctoral research focusing on politics of production and
articulation of sound as an interface to interrogate the everyday
interactions between the residents of the GP and their middle-class
neighbors. The anxiety of leading an almost schizophrenic identity as a
researcher overwhelmed me, and I invested in intellectual and
methodological inquisitions to resolve the sites from where these
split-sonic performances emanated. Not without its distressing
emotional, intellectual and theoretical reckonings, I came upon the
realization that central to the assumed sonic performance in GP was the
internalization of the logic the testimonies (insidiously in academic
texts and overtly in mainstream media) sustained: the otherness of the
slums, and its residents, and this difference arising out of the
distance from middle-class sensibilities. The pathology of assuming the
deceptive, chaste sonic identity was premised not in witnessing the
transgressive spaces women claimed in the slums (as we — the middle-class
counterparts — aspired for in our contexts) by obscene utterances, but in
the danger imagined in the identification of the self with that of the
others. The self of the others was thus not only systematically absented
from the discursive space(s), but it was also strategically demonized by
affecting a distance through assumed sonic identities to assert an
embryonic distance.

Once arrived at these deliberations, I agreed to put myself into as much
scrutiny and observation as I took the liberties of the self of the
others. Thus we — the women and I in GP — smoke, drink, discuss our affairs
and political positions (with liberal smatterings of obscenities, which
we anyway employ as punctuations) with truthfulness, which does not
necessarily obliterate the class distinctions, but it surely does not
deliberately perpetuate or deflect it. However, most significantly, we
collectively acknowledge the currency of sonic-obscene performances in
claiming spaces, though not without their violence, in our specific
contexts, even though we necessarily do not perform them together.

## Shutting Anyone’s Speakers 

Bitiya is a feisty young woman. By her own admission, she has done it
all: got married at the age of 16 to her lover against her parents’
will; had a daughter by 18; left her abusive, alcoholic husband at 19;
had a raging affair with a neighbor’s relative; supported her family,
including getting her two sisters married off, by taking up sex trade;
had a live-in lover for seven years; and presently is readying to bring
up his child after they had a volatile and violent breakup. She is a
force to reckon with: ‘I have done things on my own terms and I have
borne the consequences as well. No one in the locality can say anything
to me. I can shut anyone’s speakers.’

It was not long before I witnessed her *shutting the speakers*. She was
in the middle of a heated argument with one of her neighbours — a young
woman — when I arrived. The context or the cause of the altercation was
lost to me, and I did not dare interrupt the exchange. Even though this
exchange was liberally doused with obscene expletives, they were
restricted to the normalized *behen-chod, maadar-chod* variety, but soon
the argument picked up momentum, and so did the nature of the
obscenities.[^3_4] They became increasingly violent and sexual. By now
Bitiya was dominating this sonic exchange. The choice of her expletives
insinuated violence onto the feminine body, which included, but was not
limited to, ‘shoving things in her cunt; getting the neighbour raped by
her uncles; her \[the neighbour's\] incestuous sexual encounters with
her brother, father and any stranger who would have her; and the
ultimate evocation of the sexualized violence of the neighbour's
enjoying being raped’.

The young woman was thus silenced, and she agreed to take down the
garland of worn-out shoes she had hung facing Bitiya’s house as an
insult to the latter’s family.

I was not unaffected by this highly violent and sexualized exchange of
obscenities between the two women, even though I had witnessed similar
exchanges earlier. Noticing my unease, Bitiya offered the following
explanation. ‘Here, the only way to shut people up is by spewing more
gannd \[filth\] than they can. That is the only way anyone’s speakers
can be silenced’. The explanation offered by Bitiya was not without its
Zizek-ian evocations. By identifying the sonic performativities of
another in terms of a technological-mediated object—the speakers—Bitiya
in fact arrived at a proposition similar to that of Zizek’s that the
voice in fact can be ‘coming from somewhere in between your body’. Also
in this evocation, the metaphor of speakers, which can be turned off, is
particularly telling, as it poignantly sums up the spaces of
dominance—social and cultural spaces—the obscene-sonic performances
permit. Thus in this specific performance the sonic space is dominated
by the one who can silence or shut the speakers.

However, silence—both performed (being silent) and imposed (being
silenced)—is not a static category of sonic being and cannot be
contained within the singularity of a listening position within a
specific context. Being silent and being silenced can rupture, intersect
and interlude the soundscapes in a context in similar manifestations.
But the resounding impact of the particular performances more often than
not emanates from the spatial, social and political positionality the
performer occupies. In the Indian context, the negotiations between
being silent and being silenced is strongly situated within its
historical, religious and political epistemologies. And these manifest
themselves thus: the silence demanded of the lower-caste/classes
vis-à-vis the upper-caste/classes both in their everyday, immediate
encounters but also as agents of knowledge production; the deliberate
silencing of the subaltern as a political category, and the exalted
‘silence’ of the men of cloth.

## Vocal Digressions: The Cartography of Abusing and Loving 

The narratives of Baby and Bitiya I discuss in this essay concern
themselves with some of these negotiations: sonic dominance, silencing
and displacement of spatial-patriarchal hierarchies. But they also
venture into the geographies of emotionality of the self of the other as
articulated through the experiencing love. GP is a highly gendered
space, where the mobility of women comes under close scrutiny by both
the immediate family and the extended social network. Here, it is the
feminine body on which the otherness is doubly inscribed, both of the
structural and everyday violence. This otherness is inscribed by
limiting the performances the feminine ‘self’ is capable of—bodily,
sonically, sexually and emotionally. The being and becoming of the
feminine self is situated within a hetero-normative narrative with
subservience and compliance as its core ethos; digressions from this
normative narrative are closely monitored—mostly by the older women—and
invite social and cultural disapproval; and in extreme cases
ostracization often also resulting in physical violence.

In this section I will emphasize the manner in which instances where
sonic and emotional digressions by the feminine self disrupt and
displace the registered hetero-normative narratives, though not without
its violences and violations—to the self and others.

Both Bitiya and Baby are single parents. However, that is not the only
thing the two have in common. They both left their marital homes to
escape abusive husbands and since then have been the arbiters of their
respective families. On different occasions and in varying
circumstances, both of them have earned a decent living through sex
work. Over the years both of them had several ‘love’ affairs outside of
both their Muslim and slum community. Most of them have been
clandestine, but in both their cases one love affair stands out as the
ultimate experience: relationship with Dimpy in the case of Bitiya, and
Baby’s affair with Chand. They conducted these respective relationships
openly, challenged the communal order, and had live-in relationships.
Here it might be worthwhile to highlight (especially as regards
responding to the issue of the encounter of the researcher’s self with
that of researched) that these confidences by both Bitiya and Baby were
not revealed in a research encounter but were shared over a period of
few years during which I, as a researcher, was in turns an object of
inquisition and research to which I responded with as much truthful
integrity as I expected from the researched. Over the years we
transcended the sonic distance and displaced sonic performances of
identities to arrive at sonic intersections whilst acknowledging the
class distance, allowed us—I shared this relationship with most of the
residents of GP, especially women—to share collective sonicities. The
shared collective sonicities across class and spatial considerations
within the broader materiality and imagination of the city are not
without their negotiations, and often lend themselves to varying
practices of silencing.[^3_5]

Bitiya and Baby’s romantic undertakings allow situating the intersection
of these two digressions—sonic and emotional—within the specific
materiality of GP, whilst complicating the position of slums in the
broader imagination of the city as spaces capable of emotionality.
Bitiya’s relationship with Dimpy and Baby’s with Chand came to stormy
endings. The deliberation toward the final closure of the respective
relationships involved public fights, loud obscene and abusive exchanges
and physical violence. During and after the end of the relationships,
Bitiya and Baby, casual acquaintances until then, found in each other
unusual allies. Their open defiance of social-moral-sexual norms meant
that when the said relationships ended, they could not seek out the
social support networks available to, for instance, a recently widowed
or a married woman abandoned by her husband, or one who returned to her
parental home on account of consistent abuse, predominantly physical.
Even though in the case of both Bitiya and Baby, abuse—both physical and
emotional—along with abandonment were central to their narrative and
experience of an essentially patriarchal relationship, they were not
extended the concessions on account of the arrogant identification of
‘love’ as the determining rationale for the said relationships.

Herein unfolds the intersections of the sonic, sexual and romantic
digressions. Bitiya and Baby were incensed by their partners’ new
romantic involvements, but also for not being able to receive any social
and cultural validation for their experience of love. They both agreed
upon a retaliatory strategy. The anger they felt on account of the
displacement was, however, not directed at their former partners, but
their present lovers. And thus they decided to ‘teach’ them a lesson by
publicly shaming them, by shutting their speakers. The negotiations for
arriving at this confrontation are uncannily similar in both the
instances. Both Bitiya and Baby set out to establish the everyday
routines about the other woman in question, they gathered as many
details about their histories and present preoccupations and the
geographies of ‘love’ they were claiming with their ex-lovers.

One afternoon Baby was informed that her ex-lover, Chand, and his
present romantic interest were spotted at a public park not very far
from GP. The moment seemed opportune, and the two allies—Bitiya and
Baby—set out to shut the speakers. Once the two of them were spotted in
the park, Baby took to abusing the romantic interest in question, whilst
completely ignoring the ex-lover, in highly sexualized and violent
obscenities. The obscenities in themselves demand an intellectual
inquisition to locate the violence—real and imagined—articulated by
them; however, the concern of this essay is in the very performance of
these obscenities rather than the cultural modalities of their
production. These obscenities were marked by two prominent sets of
rhetoric: first, to establish her prowess as a sexual subject by
claiming the very real and imagined violation of and violence toward the
feminine body inherent to these obscenities. These included evocations
to the effect, ‘my cunt can hold as many cocks as I want, if you had the
same capacity you would not steal my boyfriend’; ‘I can accommodate
different cocks in different orifices at the same time’; and ‘it is my
cunt, what I do with it is my business’. But the effectiveness of the
obscene performance as a retaliatory strategy lay in disenfranchising
the other—Chand’s present romantic interest—of exactly the same sexual
subjectivity and control over it as Baby claimed for herself. These
included calling her a randi (a whore), and projecting on to her
feminine body violence of a highly sexualized nature, ‘you will be gang
raped’ and ‘hope you are fucked by your whole clan, but even that won’t
satisfy you’, and ‘obviously you are insatiable, that is why after being
fucked by everyone in your neighbourhood and family, you use your cunt
to attract other men’.

The woman in question—Chand’s romantic interest—was taken aback,
especially since Baby had Bitiya to reiterate, almost perform the
function of an echo, in this obscene performance just extending the
space and scope of sonic colonization. Soon a group of onlookers
gathered about. Some men, including Chand, tried to intervene. However,
at that moment Baby started tearing off her clothes and threatening that
if anyone interfered she would file a suit of section 376 against them.
Under Indian Penal Code, 1860, Section 376 is reserved to report and
charge the accused for attempting or having committed rape. If reported,
the police have to take action against the accused, and it remains as a
recorded criminal case against the identified perpetrator until proven
innocent. If Baby’s retaliatory strategy relied upon making a distinct
demarcation between sexual subjectivities as claimed by the sonic
performances, Bitiya’s strategic intervention to encounter the other
collapsed these demarcations by sustaining a narrative in which the
other’s corporeality was held as vulnerable to the real sexual and
physical violence she had encountered in her relationship. Indeed this
was also a publicly performed obscene sonic moment. She, along with
Baby, made an unannounced visit to Dimpy’s present lover’s house. Bitiya
then proceeded to narrate in some detail the sexual violence—both real
and rhetorical—she had endured. She evoked her body as a piece of meat
that Dimpy devoured as and when he wanted; he treated her like a
*randi*, often physically and verbally abusing her. She made a plea to
the other to reject Dimpy on account of the shared violation of the
feminine body. The climactic moment of this obscene sonic performance
was inscribing the script of an imagined violence onto the other’s body:
‘he will fuck you as he wants; if you don’t agree to what he desires, he
will not shy away from raping you and talking filth about you to his
friends’. Her ultimate threat to disrupt the romantic adventures was to
file a complaint against Dimpy under Section 376, especially as by then
she was carrying his child.

## Silencing the Lover’s Speakers: Muting the Self of the Other 

If indeed ‘voice’ is to be considered as something ‘coming from
somewhere in between your body’, then it is also laden with the
potentiality of occupying other *in-between-nesses*: spatially,
socially, politically and culturally. Voice as a simple act of speech
and its rhetorical capacity to evoke a collective reaction (for
instance, political and religious congregations, among others) is at
once grounded and displaced. Voice emanates from a time-space continuum,
but it reverberates across multitudinous, intersecting temporal and
spatial realities resonating a reiteration of the voice, intended or
otherwise. This potentiality of voice to literally, metaphorically and
rhetorically extend one’s domain of being is well acknowledged in GP.
And thus the women are required to perform silence of sorts: don’t talk
too loudly; don’t talk to strangers; don’t retaliate; don’t talk back.
The women however continually perform the sonic digressions. They
challenge, subvert and circumvent these hierarchies by claiming the
sonic space, by performing obscenities of the nature discussed in the
earlier section. However, at this juncture it is pertinent to establish
that not all sexualized obscenities are registered as digressions. Some
of them like *maader-chod* (mother fucker), *behen-chod* (sister
fucker), *chutiya* (cunt) are normalized in the given context, and are
used by both men and women as interjections and punctuations, both
jocularly and in slight altercations. These obscenities are not absent
of the imagined sexualized violence. However the site of the
violence—the body of a mother or a sister—is still claimed (or in fact
un-claimed) in its abstractions, steadfastly located within the familial
and social order wherein the figures of the mother and the daughter are
revered and respected, and thus beyond the realm of the ‘real’ violence
these imaginations contain.

The sexual and social freedoms claimed and exercised by Bitiya and Baby
are in no way singular instances of challenging the hetero-normative,
masculine cartographies in GP. However what sets aside the narrative of
these two women are the significant overlaps in their
experiences—social, cultural and romantic; but also the particular
manner in which both of them assumed a certain masculinity in claiming
these spaces. The instance of Bitiya ‘shutting anyone’s speaker’ is but
an assertion of it. They are both constantly approached by neighbours,
relatives and friends to deal and negotiate situations, especially
involving local cops, goons and matters of fights in their respective
streets; one of the reasons why both women enjoy this privileged
position is on account of their ability to spew filth and shut anyone’s
speakers. As mentioned earlier, GP is a highly gendered space where the
mobilities and performances of women—social, sexual and sonic—are highly
restricted. The ‘obscene’ sonic performances of Bitiya and Baby disrupt
the established hierarchies. The men—often amused—find it disconcerting
because of its emasculating potential to displace them from their
claimed space. The women—especially those at whom these obscenities are
directed—are further disenfranchised by the peculiar encounter of
gendered violence (however rhetorical and free of real violence) by
other women. However, Bitiya and Baby, though performing this violence
and claiming the masculine space, are not subtracted from the rhetorical
and violence onto the feminine self inflicted by these
sonic-obscenities. The only recourse available to them to claim the
masculine spaces, as women who are *besharam* \[shameless\] enough to
spew the obscenities, is to expose their own cartographic, emotional,
sexual and sonic selves to the very violence they intend to inflict, and
thus displace.

If women spewing sexualized, violent abuses are the ultimate sonic
digression, the declaration of love—as an experience and desire—by them
is its emotional equivalent. Love and its declaration threaten to
disrupt the precariously sustained order of normative social, moral and
sexual values, especially in regard to containing and controlling the
feminine self. The obscenities performed by women, which do indeed
register as sonic digressions and affectively disrupt the
spatial-patriarchal-sonic hierarchies, are the ones in which the women
directly implicate themselves and other women in the violence directed
toward the real and imagined feminine self.

## The Danger of the Other’s Love 

Love is dangerous. It resounds with social, sexual and moral
possibilities and digressions. However, the pathological dread of
declaration of love— especially by women—is the exhibitionist display of
the self vis-à-vis an identified other. In the concluding discussion to
this essay, I will situate this pathological dread of love as a peculiar
instance of perverse masculinities in a marginalized setting of the
slums. I shall also highlight the manner in which this perversity, and
thus its depravity, of slums often evoked by the state, middle-class
retort, and in cultural representation of slums is a justification to
maintain a distance from these spaces and displace them. A paternalistic
disciplining agenda is inherent to these narratives, which is
symptomatic of the broader anxiety of the dominant structures and
narratives to allow for an emotionality, and thus an identification of a
well-defined and claimed a sense of self to the marginalized spaces and
communities.

As discussed in the previous section, Bitiya and Baby found solace in
each other to articulate their experience, anxiety and trauma of love
within these negotiated cartographies. It was only within the shared
experience of displaced selves that the two of them could rehabilitate
their individual self, especially since they lacked any other narrative
spaces to claim it. The end of their respective relationships was
articulated by both of them (in collective and independent conversations
where I was inadvertently present)—in different terms—as a significant
moment of rupture to the projected and imagined sense of self, as within
weeks of the break-up both Dimpy and Chand had assumed new romantic
relationships. Socially, culturally, sonically and sexually lacking the
space to locate the love as a valid category of experience within the
real materiality of GP, the displacement from an imagined site—however
displaced—where this experience was validated by the presence of a
responsive other; both Bitiya and Baby encountered the ultimate
displacement of being absented from this collective, fantastical realm
by the insertion of an another—sexually active and sonically
performative self. The voice of the other (Dimpy’s and Chand’s newly
acquired romantic interests), muting their own, compelled them into
undertaking matters, into shutting the other’s speakers—even whilst
sharing an intimate, immediate and violent identification with the other
as always occupying the space of the Other within the hegemonic,
masculine performativities and spaces.

## Emotionality in Marginalized Spaces: The Self of the Other 

Slums are heterotopic spaces in the city. They are both dreaded and
desired, the former for its potential to disrupt the fundamental core of
social-moral values owing to the imaginations it evokes on account of
its density, dirt and digressions—social, cultural and moral. Within
this dreaded potentiality for digressions lies its perverse desire.
However, this desire rarely translates into a direct engagement with the
space, but manifests itself in the hyperbolic interest in situating the
position of the slums in the present of the city. This tension was
especially exaggerated in a city like Delhi, with its ambitions to
transform itself into a ‘*world-class, clean, green’ city.* Moreover
this transformation, essentially structural, also relies on the readily
available, cheap manual labour from these marginalized spaces and
communities. This ambition draws inspiration from following the
Singaporean model, which prides itself in transforming itself into a
‘world-class city’ under Lee Kuwan Yew in a very short period of time.
In fact, Sheila Dixit, Delhi’s chief minister in her third term, got a
special mention in LKY Cities in Transformation Award4 for her efforts
to improve the city’s environmental, civic and urban planning.[^3_6]

With ‘Delhi as Singapore’, Sheila Dixit extended to the burgeoning
middle-class in Delhi a model that immensely appealed to their
aspirational ambitions of what Slavoj Zizek identifies as ‘capitalism
with *Asian values’.*[^3_7] The scope of this text does not allow to
engage at length with the problematic and politics of employing ‘Delhi
as Singapore’ model as strategic rhetorical tool, which was affectively
employed to justify violence—by the way of demolitions, displacement and
resettlement—on marginalized spaces and communities (namely,
slum-dwellers, homeless people and migrant labour) in the city. However,
it allows to explore the particular reckoning of the self as a modern,
disciplined and self-governing individuated entity which has insidiously
found its way into urban planning discourse as well mainstream, cultural
representations. It is within this particular notionality of the self
that I complicate the position of slums in the broader imagination of
urban materiality by focusing on its emotionality with love as a key
concern in GP.

The Oxford English Dictionary defines emotions (n.) as ‘a strong feeling
deriving from one’s circumstances, mood, or relationships with others’,
and ‘emotional’ and ‘emotionality’ are defined as the states that
express this ‘strong feeling’. Central to this definition of emotions
extending to its performance, emotionality, is a strong sense of self
and the relationship of this self with an identified other. Slums are
strategically denied a self as it allows to accommodate the anxiety
about their otherness across political, intellectual, social, cultural
and indeed, emotional manifestations. In its most fundamental aspect, it
completely disenfranchises slums of any identity and thus its assertion.
It systematically limits their right to the city. This fundamental
disenfranchisement further extends into denying the slums and its
residents the possibility to imagine an (or any) other. The denial of
the self of the slums in discursive spaces, middle-class imagination and
mainstream representation is then logically extended to acknowledging
any emotional capacity or its performance, emotionality.

This double denial, first of the self of the slums and then the
possibility of othering by the other, translates not only in immediate
disenfranchisement, but also significantly allows for the displacement
of the marginalized both in the historical and futuristic imagination of
the urban. The peculiarity of the suspended displacement in the
imagination of the state is not incidental but strategic. Owing to this
suspension, the demolition, displacement or violence inflicted on the
slums finds justification as it is understood that they neither have any
historicity nor any future claims to the memory and culture of the space
they inhabit—that until re-settled by the state, they exist in a void.
And thus the ruthlessness of the violence inflicted is often masked
within the rhetoric of benevolence; in that they are in fact being
extended legitimate claims to history, memory and culture. The lack of
acknowledgement to their emotionality is yet another strategy (though
seemingly insidious and instinctive) to perpetuate their violence. For,
if the residents of the slums were indeed identified as ‘emotionally’
capable, they would have to be acknowledged to have capabilities of
individual expression, which would then extend to acknowledging their
collective identities as well.

However, this denial of emotionality does not imply that their
performance or expression of self in the public, or for that matter in
their private spaces is not unacknowledged. In fact the performance is
constantly scrutinized; however it is not engaged within the framework
of expression of self but as a gross deviance from the modern,
disciplined and self-governed self that is acquiring a currency within
the cultures of urban transformation in Delhi. And this imagination of
the self, drawing from the Singaporean model, has been affectively
consolidated in the popular, middle-class aspirations, which then find
resonance in urban planning projects, several of which — including the
Bhagidhari system — were recognized as exemplary efforts by Sheila
Dixit in the special mention she received in LKY’s Cities in
Transformation Awards.[^3_8]

## Love in the Times of Othering: Muting the Self of the Other 

At the outset this chapter announced its obscene intent. And here, in
the conclusion, wherein the narrative structure demands a closure and
neatly folded resolutions, the essay performs its hyperbolic obscenity
by its refusal to succumb to these compulsions in that it does not
arrive at a logical culmination of the conversations initiated, but aims
to leave with provocations both for the author and its reader. The
deliberation to listen into the obscene sonic performances of women in
GP, the identification of self, emotionality and moments of disruption
of sonic-spatial and patriarchal negotiations was not a cheap attempt
toward sensationalization. Instead by undertaking these listenings—not
without their violence, both real and imagined—it was to precisely
highlight the perversity of the available moments of encounters between
the mainstream and the marginalized to recognize these pathologies: of
the self of the other.

Women spewing the highly sexualized and violent abuses in GP are a
perverse titillation to the dominant agents (here, men) and narratives
in its real encounter with this body but also in situating these bodies
as sexual subjects within the broader cartographic imagination of self
and emotions. If the women are indeed articulate and claim these
violence(s), it is because they desire them. But also the vocalization
of this desire—a performance of the self, so to say—necessitates the
imperative to discipline them. And thus the space and scope available to
women to express themselves is limited to obscene performances and
encounters, which are fundamentally recognized as offensive or
disgusting by accepted standards of morality and decency. Even love, an
otherwise exalted and celebrated emotion of being within the mainstream
hegemonic discourse, is only allowed to be actualized and articulated
within the discussed obscene performances of and by the women in GP.
Thus love as an expression of self and emotionality is denied legitimacy
to the women in GP, operable only in its hyperbolic manifestations. This
particular predicament of women in GP is not only representative of the
sustained marginalization they encounter as the other within its
dominant, patriarchal context but also symptomatic of the othering slums
(as a space) encounter within the broader urban imagination. Essential
to sustain the othering—inscribed on the women in the localized context
of GP, and slums as a space in its generalized projection—is then to
deny them a well-articulated sense of self by dismissing their
emotionality.

However, emotions indeed do abound in marginalized spaces. But making
this seemingly commonsensical assertion demands qualification, and more
importantly, quantification. Within the very tapestry of this necessity
to qualify are woven the questions which have preoccupied philosophers,
scholars across disciplines and artists: the construction of the self,
the position of the individual and the intimate relationship between the
self and the state, which then raises further issues of citizenship and
the spaces available to different and diverse selves to enact it in its
complete capacity. However significant these questions are, here it is
important to attempt to unveil not only whether emotions abound in
marginalized spaces (in fact I begin with that assertion), but to
further understand the politics of denial of emotionality in these
spaces. The recognition of the emotional of the other is also plagued
with a fundamental methodological and philosophical paradox. Indeed,
here lies an inherent dilemma because in recognizing the emotional of
the other, one also acknowledges the ‘self’ of the other (and in fact
engages with it).

## And Thus, the Savage Is a Savage, and Remains a Savage

Perhaps we need to take a step back, and before pondering on the denial
of emotionality and its politics, perhaps it is pertinent to wonder why
the denial in the first place. Of course, there is the entire
contestation of the self-other as discussed in the earlier section, and
indeed inherent to this denial is a strategic disciplining agenda.
However, we, as human beings, are instinctively and intuitively aware of
emotions; we know they are important and that they shape our lives in
ways sometimes even beyond our imagination. We all have succumbed to
them: love, jealousy, loneliness, betrayal, anger, angst, hurt. This
landscape abounds in its wilderness. And only while taking a walk amid
this wilderness of emotional possibilities, especially while reflecting
on the self-other constitutions in this landscape, does it becomes
evident that the other after all is not denied all emotionality. The
emotions associated with the other, which find credence, and even
sympathy, are of anger, rage and betrayal (though only if it is against
the system). There is sometimes even space for the performance of these
emotions by the others; though it is only recognized in its collective
manifestations justified, celebrated, sympathized or dreaded within the
rhetoric of the subaltern, finally rising in the long-awaited
revolution.

In *Don’t Ask Me for That Love Again*, one of the greatest poets from
South Asia and a committed communist, Faiz Ahmed Faiz, while celebrating
his lover’s beauty, evokes most poignant imagery to justify his
forsaking the love for a cause thus: ‘There are other sorrows in this
world/comforts other than love/ Don’t ask me, my love, for that love
again’.[^3_9] Here, the sorrows are not of a personal nature, but a
response to the plight of the poor in society whose ‘\[…\] bodies
\[are\] plastered with ash, bathed in blood’ to serve the rich who have
‘cast their spell on history’. Romantic love is not for the
revolutionary, perhaps an impediment to the Revolution itself? But why
is love an anathema to revolution? And if the revolutionary herself
cannot claim love, what about those—the others—for whom the
revolutionary renounces her love? The cathartic moment in the compulsion
to choose or renounce love in one’s commitment to the self or the other
lies in the very individuated and involved articulation of love as an
experience, process and practice.

Love as a concern for philosophers, scholars, mainstream media and
popular culture remains the epitome of the celebration of the self: in
the surrendering, suffering, exhilaration and complete indulgence it
demands. It is indeed almost a narcissistic indulgence. It has capacity
to completely obliterate the other. When the poet, in the throes of his
melancholia, announces to his lover that romantic love is not an
indulgence he can afford, the loved — the other — is completely absented.
The pathos and the pain of the loved are irrelevant, and it is the
lover’s discourse that dominates. It is this dread of the other as an
individuated entity with the capacity to not only experience but also
articulate a plethora of intense emotions with the potential to absent
and obliterate the other of the other that propels the hegemonic
imagination into catatonic paralysis to acknowledge love as a valid
category of emotionality of the marginalized. And thus only spaces
available to the self of the other to claim sonic and emotional
territories is through either an obscene or a hysterical performance.
This hyperbolic rhetoric is then strategically evoked to deny an
acknowledgement of their self within broader, structural discursive
spaces.

##References
Chandola, Tripta. ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in
Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review* 34.4 (2012): 391–408.

Faiz, Ahmed Faiz. ‘Don't Ask Me for That Love Again’, trans. Agha Shahid
Ali, in *The Rebel’s Silhouette: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz,* Amherst: Massachusetts UP, 1995,* p. 5.

Pandey, Ponam Chandra. ‘Sheila Dixit: Architect of Modern Delhi, Wanted
to Develop it like Singapore’,
https://morningindia.in/sheila-dikshit-architect-of-modern-delhi-wanted-to-develop-it-like-singapore/’.

Zizek, Slavoj. 'Capitalism with Asian Values', *Al Jazeera*, 13 November
2011,
https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2011/10/2011102813360731764.html.

Zizek, Slavoj. *The Pervert’s Guide to Cinema* (dir. Sophie Fiennes,
2006).

[^3_1]: *Slavoj Zizek’s The Pervert’s Guide to Cinema* (dir. Sophie Fiennes, 2006). Emphasis added.

[^3_2]: A type of suit with loose trousers and long shirt. It is a common, everyday attire for most young women in Asia.

[^3_3]: A long scarf worn with the salwaar-kurtas; in most instances it is considered essential, and not wearing it is often seen as a sign of indecency.

[^3_4]: Literally translated as sister-fucker and mother-fucker, respectively, these abuses are used in the everyday, common exchange without the direct implications and violence suggested.

[^3_5]: Tripta Chandola, ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review*, 34.4 (2012), pp. 391–408.

[^3_6]: Special Mention - Sheila Dikshit, https://www.leekuanyewworldcityprize.com.sg/laureates/2010/special-mentions/sheila-dikshit/.

[^3_7]: Poonam Chandra Pandey, ‘Sheila Dixit: Architect of Modern Delhi, Wanted to Develop it like Singapore’, https://morningindia.in/sheila-dikshitarchitect-of-modern-delhi-wanted-to-develop-it-like-singapore/’. Slavoj Zizek, ‘Capitalism with Asian Values’, *Al Jazeera*, 13 November 2011, https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2011/10/2011102813360731764.html.

[^3_8]: The premise of the Bhagidari System (literally translated as‘participatory system’) is to involve ‘citizens’ in the processes of governance so as to make it effective, transparent and collaborative. However, the only citizen groups that are presently involved in the Bhagidari System are the Resident Welfare Association (RWAs) of middle-class, often gated settlements and market traders’associations (MTAs).

[^3_9]: Faiz Ahmed Faiz, ‘Don't Ask Me for That Love Again’, trans. Agha Shahid Ali, in *The Rebel’s Silhouette: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz,* Amherst: Massachusetts UP, 1995, 5.
