---
Pr-id: Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 36
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: 5. Collaborative Listening
Article-status: accepted
Author: Tripta Chandola
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 5. Collaborative Listening: On Producing a Radio Documentary in the Govindpuri Slums 

*With Tom Rice[^5_1]*

It was almost midnight when we started our sojourns. We, Tom and I, were
going to attend a jagran – a night long event in celebration of one god
or another, of the many in the Hindu pantheon, marked by musical and
theatrical performances – being held in the park opposite Navjeevan camp
and adjacent to Bhumhiheen camp. Jagrans, in any context, are rarely
just about evoking the gods; they are about communities coming together
and such. In the Govindpuri jhuggis, there significance is elevated on
account of several factors. The residents of the three camps - owing to
the lack of space and resources - find it difficult to organise such
collective events. The jagran, which Tom and I were going to attend, was
being sponsored by a prominent politician - Chandraprakash - and not
entirely out of altruistic reasons. In hosting and sponsoring such
events, he meant to accrue political mileage by allowing for collective
cultural indulgence which are few and far between in the jhuggis. This
brief background is essential to understand what follows thereafter.

Even though the lane cutting into Bhumhiheen camp to approach the park
is not very narrow, the sea of humanity that had descended upon the
space made it feel just inches wide. Tom, tallish and white, stood out,
and as we were trying to hurdle our way through this densely packed
human layering, we encountered drunk young men, who were keen to mark
their territory by hurling obscenities and cackling at their
performance, especially when it evoked a reaction in the crowds, namely
the women. The women were trying to make their way in too, there were
young girls - either in groups or accompanied by an elder - equally keen
to indulge in the rare occasion of collective, cultural event. However,
the space, the experience and performances were essentially masculine in
nature.

Tom, who had arrived in Delhi for the first time only hours back, was
overwhelmed. And not surprisingly; I did not let it be known then, but
even I was. He insisted we go back, and we did. At the corner of the
intersection, we stood, his sense of unease apparent. I rolled a smoke,
whilst Tom regained his breath. We agreed to make our way back into the
park; in retrospect, I am not sure whether Tom remained overwhelmed, but
as soon as the tents acting as makeshift entrances into the park opened
up, he was at his sonic best: listening, recording, catching sounds as
they were hurling about. The expansiveness of the park, replete with all
the props for the theatrical night to follow - a stage, children, men
and women dressed in the attire of different gods and bright lighting -
was a relief; even to me.

And thus wetting his ears in this deep end Govindpuir jhuggis
soundscapes, we set out over the period of next three weeks to record
for the BBC radio documentary on Govindpuri Sounds.

The next three-weeks were a sonic indulgence at its loudest. Tom soon
acquired a fan-following among the residents of particularly Navjeevan
camp, especially the children. The association being immediately
established on account of the Tom-Jerry cartoon, and Tom was often
referred to as Tom Tom. During the three-weeks, we followed the lives of
women who had gone through difficult circumstances; we listened into
women filling water; we arrived early in the morning to listen into the
jhuggis wake up; we often stayed late nights.

It was an exhilarating experience for me; even though I realised how
demonic my laugh is when Tom would playback the day’s recording. This
was on several accounts. It was the first time that I sharing the ears,
so to say, with someone else such that we listened into similar notes
and modulations; this practice of collaborative, shared listening which
at once validated my own listening but also compelled me to tune into
someone else’s as well. Here, a point needs to be made. I did share
listenings with the residents of the jhuggis, especially the women. By
the time of recording the documentary, almost a decade and so after my
initial entries into Govindpuri, we had arrived at our own
‘collaborative’ practice of listening. By now, I was so tuned into
Govindpuri that I had almost instinctively learned how to ‘block’
certain sonic manifestations.

The manner in which the lived, almost everyday collaborative listening
with the residents of Govindpuri was different from the experiences of
sharing the ears, so to say, with Tom was on account of the fact that he
was as much an outsider as one can be. We had first met in the quietness
of Cambridge where we discussed listening, soundscapes and strange
fictions. For me, the collaborative listening with Tom then was a
validation of sorts of my own ‘ears’ in that sense. I had pursued my
doctoral research in another staid, quietness, that of Brisbane. Though
I did not live in Brisbane for prolonged durations whilst conducting the
research, I spent almost nine months at a stretch there to finish
writing my thesis. The exhausted silence of the city had a very
disquieting impact on me. Away from the multiplicities of sonic
manifestations of not only Govindpuri, but also the city of Delhi, I
would often find myself wondering and worrying whether what I was not
‘making up’ the listenings. This is not only a mere admission of
insecurity in oneself (though as a third-world academic one’s work is
rarely taken seriously if not validated by one or another ‘first world’
scholars), but is symptomatic of more structural and systemic concerns
of production of knowledge when it is relying on modes outside of the
established ‘verifiable, legible, visual’ practices.

The collaborative listening, which the recording towards the documentary
compelled, thus only lend to further tuning my ears into the
considerations of soundscapes as a valid social, cultural, political
artefact, particularly for those on the margins? As there are teaching
modules to acquaint those eager with nuances of visual cultures, could
there be a similar possibility with soundscapes or aural practices? In
what ways to think about listening not only as a matter of auditory
compulsion or even ‘engaged hearing’ but perhaps ‘privileged hearing’?
In what ways to understand, decode, call out these ‘privileges’? Can we
think about listening as a valid, without concerning ourselves with its
verifiability or not, methodological undertaking? In what ways then do
we refine that reckoning?

**Tripta Chandola (TC):** I listened into the everyday of the slums in Govindpuri.
Retrospectively, it is a tempting proposition to posit this ‘intent’ as
an intellectually driven project but the fact of the matter is that it
was an purely instinctive, responding to an impulse -political, poetic,
intellectual and theoretical - to distance myself from the manner in
which ‘slums’, its residents were framed in both academic and mainstream
discourse. I listened, not because I was either all too familiar with
the rich, interdisciplinary theoretical, intellectual contributions to
sensorial anthropology, sound studies or even the explosive potential,
possibilities which soundscapes allow to engage with the lives,
histories and testimonies especially of those on the margins, outside
the literate, hegemonic space.

**Tom Rice (TR):** Yes, I think this an interesting point about the listening being
instinctive. I had never been sure when reading your work why you
started listening to Govindpuri in the first place, but I think in the
end that probably the soundscape made an impression on you, and drew
attention to itself (there is a real sense on which sound has an agency
of its own in this respect, and theory from STS on non-human agency can
be applied to sound quite successfully I think). After the sound
environment has made itself noticed, the more intellectual attention, by
which I mean ‘deliberate thought about sound and reading relevant
literature from the social sciences’, perhaps began to take over in your
thought process. I remember you saying that you do not think of yourself
as a particularly auditory person, which is interesting. Clearly the
sounds of Govindpuri were rich, intriguing and powerful enough to make
you devote a very great deal of time and energy to their study (talk
about possessing agency!). I myself have always had an interest in
sound. I don’t know exactly where this came from, but by the time I went
to university I knew I wanted to work in radio and to document life and
explore ideas in a sonic medium. In the final year of a degree in Social
Anthropology I was given the opportunity to write a dissertation on a
subject entirely of my own choosing, I decided that I would write about
the radio station at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary (situated very close
to Edinburgh University and to the flat where I was living at the time).
I was working as a volunteer there in order to try to accumulate skills
and experience in radio with the aim of applying for a job in radio
later on. I was also working in student and community radio around then.
My initial intention for the dissertation had been to look at the way
the DJ’s on the hospital radio station used music and techniques of
speech to try to create a sense of unity among patients, a sort of
imagined community of people brought together temporarily in the
hospital because of ill health. One of my jobs at the station, which was
called Red Dot Radio, was to go around the wards and to gather music
requests from the patients which would be played on the evening’s
programme. However, many of the patients to whom I spoke drew attention
to the sonic environment of the ward and the generally negative ways in
which it affected them - preventing them from sleeping, waking them
early, provoking feelings of irritation, disgust, exposure,
embarrassment and so on. They used the hospital radio as a way of
temporarily escaping this unpleasant sound environment. I say
temporarily escaping because the fact that they were hospitalised meant
that they were unable to escape it fully until they were discharged.
They were to a large extent a captive audience, and had little real
choice but to exist within the hospital and its soundscape. It was only
really at this point, and through the instruction and direction of the
patients themselves, that I began to listen to the sound environment of
the hospital, noticing its qualities and being surprised by their
variety and intensity. This was the start of the project that began with
the dissertation and culminated in my monograph which you mention -
Hearing and the Hospital. But ever since that listening with patients I
have been drawn to researching sonically rich and intense environments.

**TC:** I listened, intently and attentively, first on the account that
I as an ethnographer had to ‘mute’ my own position-premised hearings
into the jhuggis. This ‘tuning of the ear’, so to say, opened up
journeys and experiences of the self and the space of jhuggis as I had
never heard in the academic, mainstream discourse, at least not so
loudly and definitely not so assertively. Of the aspirations, romances,
heartbreaks, deceit, negotiations, politics beyond the narratives of
‘lacks, deprivations, misery and marginality’. I was at once seduced and
humbled. And following from this, I listened, even more intently,
because it was this un-listened present, past and futures of and from
the jhuggis which I wanted to insist on.

**TR:** I think that one thing an ethnographic approach does, or rather,
one thing one is aiming to achieve using an ethnographic approach, is to
educate oneself as to the way in which others attach meaning or
importance to particular sounds in their day to day environment. One
then hopes to relay something of that way of listening - be it in a
written text, radio programme, audio essay - whatever the medium. It’s
not so much about muting one’s own hearings in my experience, but about
changing the way one hears and documenting that change. That was what
Govindpuri Sound was about I would say. Describing the sound environment
but also the way that people live in relation to it.

That expression ‘tuning the ear’ is interesting. One can certainly
become more knowledgeable skillful at listening to an environment. One
can notice sounds and qualities of sound one didn’t before, and one can
become better able to judge the kinds of feelings and associations a
sound might evoke in a listener or group of listeners. I guess it’s
important from my point of view not to think about ‘the ear’ in a
reductive way, but to recognise that ‘the ear’ also involves the
integrated brain/mind/body and is bound up with the position one
occupies in social and geographical space, with postures, technologies
(most obviously the microphone in *Govindpuri Sound*), attention, mood
and so on.

I certainly felt while we were making Govindpuri Sound, that, as you
say, what one heard was at odds with the mainstream academic and public
discourse surrounding the slums. Almost continually there were snatches
of romantically charged music drifting out of houses, and people
listening and singing along to these. When they saw us walking around
with a microphone many people were understandably curious. Often they
wanted to sing into the microphone and and be recorded, usually singing
romantic or wistful songs. As I say in the programme, people we met were
often more ready to sing than be interviewed. There could be interesting
political implications to this observation. There seemed to be a
convention that the microphone should elicit performance rather than
comment. Perhaps this would have applied less to people who understood
themselves to occupy a higher place in the social hierarchy and who
possessed different levels of education, confidence in the value of
their own opinions and so on, though I am speculating here. Negotiations
and arguments were also noticeable too: there was a lot of back and
forth, sometimes at high energy and volume levels, though didn’t
understand the subject matter here so can’t comment as to what it was
really about. I was quite surprised by how much laughter I heard, though
again, I’m can’t be sure I understood the subtleties of the spirit in
which people were laughing. I got the laughter, but I’m not certain I
got ‘the joke’.

I relate to what you are saying about aspects of the slum experience not
being listened to. Listening in this sense - as a kind of focused and
empathetic engagement - is very valuable where it has not been done
before and where it occupies a space that has been neglected by more
established modes and techniques of attention and attending.

**TC:** I listened because within this ontological engagement with the
residents of Govindpuri, I was able to present their lives, sense of
spaces, self, negotiations as articulated and claimed by themselves
within their own grammar and using their vocabularies. I was allowed
possibilities to engage with the everyday of the jhuggis
besides/alongside the logic or experiences of poverty, deprivation and
marginalities (even though not losing sight of it in a broader,
structural sense). The poverty, the deprivations, the limited
infrastructural availabilities were not a secret that had to be
unraveled. These are obscenely obvious, and from my political,
intellectual position, it was a bloody affrontation to the intelligence
of the residents to ask them to spell it out. And to overlook the need
to ‘verify’, ‘document’ and ‘validate’ these experiences of the
marginalities - the seduction of triangulation - which captures the
imagination of so many, especially when engaging with the lives of the
poor.

**TR:** Yes, I don’t disagree with anything you have said in the
paragraph above. It may not be appropriate for me to say this in this
piece, but I suppose I tend to encourage people to be realistic about
their claims. It’s not as if you spoke to all the slum residents (this
would be impracticable) and I don’t think you are claiming to represent
all of them. Rather during a very long period of being a researcher in
GP on a range of projects, establishing close and long-lasting
friendships with particular people there, and speaking to a great many
other slum residents over time in a wide variety of contexts, you have
developed a detailed and nuanced understanding of life in GP, one which
is not present in the impersonal and generalising discourses used by
researchers in Development and Urban Studies, for instance. I am just
riffing here...

**TC:** In thinking through this exchange, I read your book - *Hearing
and the Hospital* - again. I am not sure in what frame or from what
vantage point I was engaging with your research earlier, but in this
re-reading (whilst thinking about re-listening into Govindpuri), I can
draw very definite parallels to my own research.

The position of the patient in your research - particularly those in
post-operative and intensive care units - immobile and incapacitated to
give their testimonies of their state of well-being within a particular
knowledge praxis (here, medical sciences) nevertheless do not cease to
be, so to say, asserting themselves through their ‘sonic bodies’. And in
the attentive ‘sethoscopic listening’ - I will return to the this
conceptual framing, which in the moment I am absolutely titalted and
excited by - which these ‘sonic bodies’ demanded, you also
locate/identify significant developments in medical sciences,
technologies, modalities in making meaning itself.

**TR:** Yes, again I don’t disagree with anything you say in the
paragraph above. I guess I’m not sure how to relate it back to GP at
this point. I guess we need to remember too that the readers are
unlikely to have come across Hearing and the Hospital or to know what is
in it.

For me, the position of the patient and the residents of the jhuggis
share a certain incapacitated predicament. Is that too much of stretch?
In both instances, the ‘body’ in question lacks a definite agency to
penetrate the very hegemonic, discursive spaces and knowledge practices
which in return locates/ensures its ‘well being’: in the case of the
patients within the historiography of medical sciences itself and for
the residents of ‘slums’ within the legal, development, urban planning
discourse. However the ‘sethoscopic listening’ which extends
palpability, evidencing the living which merely the ‘seeing’ might miss,
to the patient in the case of the hospital, and listening as a
political, methodological tool in the case of Govindpuri which compels
engaging with the everyday beyond and besides the framing of ‘poverty,
etc’., is potent with the possibilities of accommodating, acknowledging
on their own accord the records, histories, experiences of those on the
‘margins’? Here, I am locating the patient’s body (and the agency she
can assert) within Sontag’s problematisation in Illness as Metaphor.

I think you have really got to the heart of why, for me, listening is
important as an ethnographic technique and also just as a way of being
in the world. It’s about ‘evidencing the living which merely the
“seeing” might miss’. It’s also about attending to something that is
widely dismissed as superficial and unimportant.

To continue that idea, a common attitude I encounter is: “why are you so
interested in sound when (in the hospital context) people are undergoing
serious operations/need to be protected from hospital acquired
infections/there is a funding crisis in the National Health Service”
etc. In GP it might be: “Why are you so interested in sound when there
are serious problems with things like access to water”. My response to
this is to feel: “Well, there is a lot going on in this soundscape that
evidences the things you are concerned about (for instance, exposure to
noise seems likely to affect patient sleep and rest and so to affect
recovery rates, which means longer patient stays in the hospital and
makes the hospital less financially efficient, and the busyness of the
soundscape reflects the complexity of the contact that is taking place
on the ward and so reflects the difficulty of controlling infection),
but there is also much going on acoustically in the ward to which you
are oblivious because you don’t perceive it (for instance the patients
reacting with disgust and embarrassment to their own and other peoples’
body sounds which are audible in the enclosed and densely occupied space
of the ward, and which have profound implications for the experience of
hospitalisation). In GP you could say, for instance, that the presence
of water sounds in the soundscape is reflective of water scarcity and
wider scarcity of vital resources, but that, as you suggest in your
research, you also miss the gossip, teasing, flirtation, abusing,
shaming etc that is going on if you don’t listen, and these kinds of
exchange are vital to the experiential fabric of life in GP.

**TC:** As a sound anthropologist, do you think that soundscapes \[as
social, material, cultural, political artifacts and listening - in
different ways - as a methodological praxis\] have this inherent
‘disruptive’ potential to disturb the hegemonic practices of knowledge
production? Have the possibilities been exhausted? What are the
possibilities - methodologically, intellectually, theoretically - of
exhausting these potentialities, if in fact these resound with it? Or am
I leaning towards romanticisation of positing visuality vis-a-vis
aurality as binaries?

**TR:** This is a huge question or set of questions and realistically I
probably can’t answer them at all fully. I think on the whole that
trying to set up visuality and aurality in a binary is unhelpful and
tends not to work. In real life situations where the senses can only be
decoupled in very temporary and somewhat artificial ways, and
technological is increasingly blurring the boundaries between what is
heard and what is visualised (see Ingold and also Sterne on these
issues). That said, I think it can be helpful to consciously place
emphasis on the aural and de-prioritise the visual at times in order to
pursue particular research aims, and that this act can be disruptive to
hegemonic practices of knowledge production. I don’t think listening is
‘inherently’ disruptive, but it can be used in disruptive ways. I do not
think we are even close to exhausting the disruptive possibilities of
listening as a way of producing knowledge, and actually I think that in
the social sciences we are only at the beginning of this journey. What
the possibilities are ‘methodologically, intellectually, theoretically -
of exhausting these potentialities’ is a big question and might need a
different article.

**TC:** In your conclusion, whilst taking the Perspective Tour of the
permanent collection at the Wellcome Museum in London, you make the
point to the attendee of ‘requiring imagination’ to attend to the
‘cacophony’ which would be at the heart of the ‘acoustic archaeology of
medicine’. In the similar vein, I would like to stretch this call for
‘imagination’ to engage with the sounds of the everyday of the jhuggis,
all relegated to all encompassing and overwhelming ‘noise’. However,
what would be the task - as anthropologist/ethnographers invested in
listening, in soundscapes - to enliven the imagination of those not so
‘sonically tuned’?.

**TR:** I suppose what’s needed here is a direct provocation to listen
to the jhuggis and their history (if one is taking an acoustic
archaeology approach). I remember when we were making GP sound you took
me to what is now a rather nice public park, a large green space near
Nehru place. You pointed out that this had once been a very large slum
settlement, set up by people who came to work on the buildings that
became Nehru place itself, and catering for the needs of all the
workers. Then, to cut a long story short, once the building project was
finished the slum was cleared and replaced with the park. I have good
audio of you, actually sounding quite emotional, as you explain that
there is no longer any trace of the slum and that no one in the years to
come will know that a slum ever existed there. You can hear the sense of
loss and anger in your voice about all the traces of human life that are
now gone. This would be a good point at which to provoke people to
reimagine what that place might have sounded like. You could even do an
installation in that park where you urge people to remember these people
whom you suggest public discourse does not regard as worth remembering.
Or you could gather interviews from people who lived there and then play
them to visitors to the park over headphones as part of a site specific
installation. That could be interesting and, as you suggest, enlivening
to the imagination.

I feel that one thing the hours of recording for GP sound we made might
do is represent an archive of what sounds could be heard in that
particular place at that particular time. This could be very valuable
for some GP residents if (and when?) the slum is removed and its
inhabitants are ever relocated. Or it could be useful as a sort of
public record or cultural resource. Then again, you have to wonder who
would want to take the time to listen - but there may well be people one
day who would have an interest. The recordings could be catalogued and
given to an institution like the British Library Sound Archive (though
there might well be an Indian equivalent).

I was speaking to someone
recently about the GP sound documentary, and he suggested that the
sounds could be edited into a package of ‘sounds from a Delhi slum’ and
that permission to use them could then be sold to people who might be
interested in making films, audio pieces, video games etc using them. It
raises questions as to who really owns these recordings (the people of
GP? You as the researcher? Me as the recordist? The production company?
The BBC as the commissioning body and funder of the recordings even
though not all of them were used in the programme? No one?). It might be
an interesting project to consult GP residents on this question and find
out what they feel as well as to ascertain the legal position. I doubt
the sale of permission to use these recordings would ever make serious
money, and it may not be worth the labour of editing the package
together, but the idea does raise interesting questions as to who should
have what rights over the soundscape and recordings of it.

##References
Rice, Tom. 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx.
The documentary was commissioned by BBC for its program The Documentary
and was aired on 2 February 2015. More information here: https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/34775/Tom%20Rice%20Govindpuri%20Sound%20REF%20document.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.

[^5_1]: Tom Rice is a Senior Lecturer (Anthropology) at the University of Exeter, http://socialsciences.exeter.ac.uk/sociology/staff/tomrice/. Tom Rice, 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx. The documentary was commissioned by BBC for its The Documentary program and was aired on 2 February 2015. More information here: https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/34775/Tom%20Rice%20Govindpuri%20Sound%20REF%20document.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.
