---
Pr-id: Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 36
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: 9. To Whom Do You Beautifully Belong?
Article-status: accepted
Author: Tripta Chandola
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 9. To Whom Do You ‘Beautifully’ Belong? The Slums’ Response (If Indeed They Were Allowed the Tongues): Or, The Rite of Passage to the Right to the City: But, Where Is the Self of the Slums? 

I begin with a poetic evocation:

*'Their relationship consisted*
<br/>*in discussing if it existed’*

\- Thom Gunn, *Jamesian*.[^9_1]

After almost two-decade of slumming, so to say, it is in these two brief
lines that I am finally able to locate (and articulate) the relationship
between the city and the slums. The core of this cathartic relationship
is not defined by the existence of the slums or the manner in which the
slums come into existence, but is in fact determined by negotiating the
modalities of dealing (or in fact not dealing ) with the *existing* of
the slums in the city. Central to these discussions - one-sided, and
deliberated by the hegemonic voices with both control over the
means/modes of production and determined intent of maintaining control
over the expropriation of resources - is the strategic, systemic and
structural denial of the sense of self to the slums. This denial of self
to the slums manifests in varied ways in the everyday negotiations to
the imaginative accommodation of these spaces in the future of the city.
The denial of the self of the slums is not always predicated on intent
of design or deliberation but informed - overtly, insidiously or subtly
- by the processes of estrangement, alienation, dehumanisation and
depersonalisation central to the capitalist machinery and reducing the
labour as its living appendage.

In this essay, I draw attention to the manner in which dehumanization of
the slums (and its residents), with particular insistence on denial of
its emotionality, is and will remain a crucial impediment to the
actualisation of the call of the ‘Right to the City’ until significant
discursive shifts are compelled. I will also highlight the manner in
which the ‘anxiety of proximity[^9_2]’ with the slums in the everyday
interactions, in urban planning processes but also in academic and
activist undertakings, however well-intentioned, further lends to
reducing and relegating the slums to an ‘infantile, perennially
peripheral and an abnormality’ reckoning. Lastly, towards the mandate of
actualising the ‘right to the city’, as Lefebvre envisaged in the manner
of an ongoing, urgent utopian project whilst not succumbing to the
tendencies of ‘unimaginative realism’, the essay insists the need of the
hour is to discursively shift from the ‘moral, humanitarian,
communitarian, paternalistic’ evocations whilst engaging with the
concerns of the slums to collective, ethical responsiveness and
democratic participation in the urban futures by both sounding and
responding to the clarion call for a revolution which shifts its focus
to, as Lefebvre emphasises, ‘defined either in terms of the political
change at the level of the state or else in terms of the collective or
state ownership of the means of production’. He further insists, that
‘such limited definitions of revolution will no longer suffice. The
transformation of society presupposes a collective ownership and
management of space founded on the permanent participation of the
“interested parties”’ with their multiple, varied and even contradictory
interests. This revolutionary project, Lefebvre continues, ‘whether
utopian or realistic, must, if it is to avoid hopeless banality, make
the reappropriation of the body, in association with the reappropriation
of space, into a non-negotiable part of its agenda’.[^9_3]

Lefebrve’s call for the ‘right to the city’ is a theoretical,
philosophical and political project toward an ongoing, dialogic
negotiation which involves inhabitants engaging each other in meaningful
interactions, interactions through which they overcome their separation,
come to learn about each other, and deliberate together about the
meaning and future of the city. These encounters make apparent to each
inhabitant their existence in and dependence on a web of social
connections. They come into consciousness of themselves as inhabitants,
as embedded in a web of social connections, as dependent on and stewards
of ‘the urban’. As they become conscious in this way, they recognize the
need to struggle against the industrial capitalist city and for the
urban. They come to see participation not as speaking at a public
hearing or serving on a citizens’ panel, but as the living struggle for
a city that is controlled by its inhabitants.

In responding to the discussions about the right to the cities, the
symptomatology that presents itself are two-folds: why does the ‘right
to the city’ still remain an un-actualized project, particularly within
the Lefebrevian intent and as David Harvey articulates towards ‘the
greater democratic control over the production and use of surplus’?[^9_4]
And, why do the existence of the slums deliberate the discussions (or,
the lack thereof or when in fact undertaken in skewed and stunted) and
sustained anxiety? The prognosis of this diagnostic examination is that
the denial of the ‘self’ of the slums is a conditioned impediment which
perpetually defers the moment and momentum to accrue the critical
threshold essential to actualise the first and overcome the second
symptomplogy.

I begin with a personal admission of my initial encounter with the
slums. Even though now I claim and demand intimacy, embedded
relationships and investments in and with the slums, the first couple of
years were nothing less than fraught with anxiety. I was adequately
acquainted (and sincerely) believed in the ‘right’ left politics of the
rights of the marginalised, the politics and violence of displacement
and disenfranchisement, but left to my own devices of having to spend
hours into days in the lanes of the slums, I found myself ill-equipped
to deal and negotiate with the emotions the intensity of the slums
materiality, pervasive everydayness of the denial of internalised –
which the residents encountered merely on account of being
slum-dwellers. But my anxiety was far more insidious (in response to my
own limited experiential encounters with the slums but also responding
to the popular/mainstream reckoning of the slums). In short, at times I
was scared, at other times, violently angered by gendered, communal,
caste practices within the slums, and at still other times found myself
deeply drawn to a few and took a strong dislike to others.

In the essay, *In Search of the Slums Never-Lost*, I discuss these
encounters at length. However, here, I want to insist on the *knot in
the stomach* that I perpetually felt during my early days of forays into
the slums. This sense particularly heightened to intensifying crescendo
- which often left me debilitated, emotionally, politically and
intellectually - when I started pursuing research towards my doctoral
research. I no longer had the convenience of a project’s mandate to hide
behind (which initially brought me into the slums); I had chosen to be
here. I had written an impassioned proposal, ‘re-drawing the lines’
about the engaging, exploring and eventually ‘revealing’ the selves of
the slums which not only most did not want to acknowledge, let alone
encounter. Among my middle-class cohorts and friends, I chided them, I
accused them of classist positionalities, I was quick to make a
judgement: ‘what the fuck do you know, I, only I, know the reality, I
have ventured into the lanes, I have broken bread with “them”, they are
my friends’, and so on and so forth. For performative purposes, such
anguished cries from a bleeding heart often got me the attention I was
precisely evoking it to achieve attention, a shoulder to cry on, and
sometimes, a long embrace into a dark night.

But, when the mornings beckoned and I had to set out to the slums, the
*knot in the stomach* gripped the being of me. I felt hollow and
hypocritical, the embraces and attention from the nights pungent. I
theoretically knew enough about working the hyphen to speak of the
knotty entanglements and messiness poetically and politically. However
in the ‘now and present’ of conducting research, I found myself in such
knotty entanglements that the ‘selves of the other’ presented themselves
more as hauntings from far-distant shores.

I begin with an intensely personalised account my own encounter with the
slums to insist that (and particularly to the group of aspiring
academics, activists, or fundamentally as the collective custodians of
urban futures) that however well-intentioned, politically sound,
theoretically rigorous one’s position is, the ‘encounter’ with the other
– here, the slums – irrespective of its essentiality (either traumatic
or otherwise tantalising) demands reflexivity. Because ‘as such, the
encounter constitutes the link between stability and change, determinacy
and contingency, theory and practice. It is therefore one of the key
elements to unlock a new materialist understanding of political
transformation. The encounter is also the connecting thread between
politics and aesthetics’.[^9_5] But there are more fundamental
implications lending and leading to the ‘denial of the self of the
slums’. Masking one’s own anxiety – as a researcher, activist, and an
academic - particularly when it is from the vantage point of privilege
at the intersectionality of class, caste, gendered, and communal
affiliations only goes as far as to suffices as not dealing with the
*knot in the stomach.* But these anxieties nevertheless find their ways
of accommodation in academic texts, policy documents, activists
interventions, and thus the insidious task of obliterating the self of
the slums is set in motion. If the other does not have the agency to
evoke a response, stir an emotion, does the other even has capacity to
emote? And if the other in fact cannot emote, how can the other be
trusted or even recognised to have the ability to make decisions,
determinations unto themselves?

I sought out guidance from the non-state actors both working with the
slums of Govindpuri and those involved in broader concerns of the
‘rights of the slums’. I took recourse to academic texts to if not find
a ‘guide’ - *a kunji -* to this slumming, but at least a hint of the
similar anxiety experienced and articulated by other researchers and
academics. I was left wanting from both of these engaged groups in the
concerns of the ‘slums’.

The overarching tendency of the non-state actors and activists was \[and
continues\] to situate the slums as a draining resources of the state:
‘demented; lazy; and prone to avarice and indulgences of the morally
compromised sorts’. The more well-intentioned of the sorts, among this
group, treated the same constituent group in a highly, paternalistic,
patronising manner: ‘but, they don’t know really know what they want,
they have all the wrong priorities’. And, ‘of course, you cannot discuss
politics with them, particularly when you find their views problematic,
do not ‘antagonize them; they don’t know better’, was the advice given
to me by a very senior slum activist in the city, when I was in the
midst of pursuing my research on political formations within the slums
of Govindpuri and which finds it way in the essay, *The Subaltern as a
Political Voyeur.*

> Of course, I recognise and do stand for the rights of the slums, but
> do they have to live so close to us. I am a single woman, I bought
> this flat for the peace, solitude it offers and now this filth, I feel
> scared \[…\] I have never walked the arterial road connecting her
> apartment block through the two camps of the slums to the main road,
> and thank god for the aircon in the car, I have never rolled down the
> windows, that way I can not only avoid the noise but also the smells.

Thus reckoned a self-proclaimed left-leaning political scientist living
in the apartment block across the road from Navjeevan Camp about her
neighbours in Govindpuri. During my doctoral research, in response to my
question about why the residents of the slums where in fact allowed in
the intimate, domestic spaces of the middle-class households in the
capacity of drivers, house-help, nannies and such, the usual refrain
was, ‘our houses are civilized \[…\] left to their own whims, it then
they get the crazies; it is actually not their fault, it is where they
live’.

In the academic texts, I felt even more fraught, I could not relate to
the ‘researcher’ venturing about the slums in these accounts. The lanes,
conversations and the experiences of the slums for the researchers in
these texts were bereft of the ‘anxiety’ I found myself engulfed in.
Here, the position of the ethnographer is eulogized vesting in her
unlimited and unrestricted access to venture into a ‘site’ with the
‘subjects’ more than eager to reveal their histories, experiences, and
lives. And the fact of the matter is that, and recounting from my own
personal encounters in the slums of Govindpuri, but also in other
marginalized spaces, yes, indeed, as a middle-class, educated person
embodying structural privileges, I (and most other researchers) have
unlimited, or at least unquestioned, access into these spaces. But
this admission is very rarely made. And even rarer is the
acknowledgement that if the positions and spaces of research and
researched were reversed, would the middle-class researcher in fact
allow herself to be researched; and particularly if the interlocutor
came from the margins?

The answers to this question are difficult to find, not because the
answer is easy, but because the gated community of academic scholarship
on slums has collectively agreed on never allowing these questions to be
raised.

These reckoning of the slums – and their representations – at the most
fundamental level set the tonality, and thus the practices, of the
‘denial of the self of the slums’. Here, even whilst high-pitched calls
for the voice and agency of the slum-dwellers is made for, the manner in
which they are ‘represented’ the slums come across in monochromatic,
passive and ‘not fully evolved’ entities in the Marxian sense. Thus, if
both the ‘needs and there fulfilment’ of the ‘other’ in fact can only be
identified and met with by their benefactors’, can the ‘other’ than be
reckoned to have any capacity of ‘self-determination’? The flattening of
the anxiety of the researcher’s - their *knot in the stomach* never
really acknowledged - thus also lends to the *knotty entanglements* on
the field and the multiplicity of the selves of the other being
flattened out.

The otherwise ‘harmless’ practices which are commonplace (and deeply
embedded in class, caste, gendered, and communal prejudices) in
middle-class households, are enacted in different and varying manners
across activists and academic engagements with the slums. The most
commonplace of these are: more often than not *not* acknowledging the
residents by their names; very rarely deconstructing, or at least
discussing, the mandate and agenda of the project at hand in its
entirety (to make explicit the web of connections, etc.); to discuss the
arguments drawn from these engagements, to attempt to ‘deconstruct the
space of theory and politics’ for the otherwise celebrated residents of
the slums as collaborators. The framing to ‘mobilise, engage and
involve’ the residents, more often than not, is in the vein of ‘we are
conducting this research/campaign for you? We will fight for your
rights’. And almost always, the researcher never returns to the ‘site’
to discuss how far he travelled with the ‘insights’ and the tales he
wove, the argument he made and the publications accreditations he got.

In my doctoral research, I conducted an ethnography of everyday
interactions within the slums of Govindpuri and with their middle-class
neighbours through the politics of sound. The research highlighted the
nuanced practices and processes of ‘othering’ the residents of the slums
enacted both within the slums (across class, caste, gendered and
communal vectors) but also that the middle-classes are reckoned as
‘immoral, corrupt and repugnant’ as the latter views them. Over the
years, I have closely followed the lives of sex-workers,
domestic-workers (both, men and women in different capacities) and
manual labourers, among others.

Of course the residents of the slums – in different capacities of the
permissible encounters – with their *others* are well aware of the
*othering* they are subjected to and it is recognised as stripping them
of their selfhood, requiring them of performances of passivity,
invisibility, unbecoming and unlistening. The residents of the slums are
very well aware of the ‘benefits’ that can be accrued from their
encounters with non-state actors - activists, researchers, and
academics, and thus the residents are also well-versed in ‘performing
poverty, helplessness, and speaking of oneself only in vocabularies of
lackings’. These performativities of dehumanising themselves in
repressed and perverted ways extends in not only in their interactions
with the state agencies and in accessing infrastructural and fundamental
services – banks, hospitals and schools.

The residents have their own strategies to deal with this ‘othering’ -
there is Baby who had worked in a Tamil-Brahmin household for past
twenty years and who on the first ‘encounter’ with Baby assumed of her
Hindu, widowed status for the lack of adornments maintained thus with
them not revealing her identity as a Muslim woman, well aware that she
would be asked to quit. Babita, the sex worker, who to maintain
associations with a regular client who pays for her rent, sometimes
afford her children’s fees and other necessities to ‘bathe with filtered
water’ - using the expensive water filter which he installed – so as to
maintain his ‘purity’. She chides behind his back, that not only does
she not use the filtered water for herself but also not whilst preparing
a bath for him as well, and thus adulterates him. The men who work as
drivers for middle-class ‘*madams and their daughters’* share very
intimate space and are privy to their intimate ongoings and discussions
admit to performing ‘unlistening’, find it particularly amusing that
these women assume they don’t understand English, and in doing so
discuss the details of their ‘ongoings’ in salacious manner. In
particular when it is regarding the young women from nearby apartment
blocks, it often leads to the said young women being targeted in rather
unbecoming ways, but also leads to these men exercising far more control
over their women so that they do not start emulating those way. The
women in the slums find it particularly difficult to find redressal for
domestic, sexual and other kinds of abuse, or assert their claims or
articulate their emotions. Until 2012, when the Indian state ruled
attempt to suicide not a criminal offence, it was not an uncommon
‘threat (and at times put in effect) of 376'.[^9_6] However, since it has
been ruled that ‘attempt to suicide’ is decriminalised but not abetment
to suicide, the practice of , ‘drinking just enough phenyl, calling in
100 number \[the national helpline number to call the police
authorities\] and negotiating whilst or before the cops are summoned for
testimony with those harassing’ has become a popular manner in which the
women seek redressal. The sex-workers in Govindpuri, who during India
Against Corruption, 2011, and following Demonization, 2018, had to
extend their ‘services’ not only to the local police personnel
threatening them with consequences but also to local shopkeepers for
their daily upkeep, and used to effectively to maintain their work,
ensure their children’s education and maintain the household upkeep.

Whilst it is seductive to reckon these acts as performance of the
assertion of the self of the slums, these assertions accrue any currency
of recognition when performed across two registers – either by being
violent or by implicating themselves – however imaginary – in the acts
of violence. The ruthlessness of the violence inflicted is often masked
within the rhetoric of benevolence; in that they are in fact being
extended 'legitimate' claims to history, memory and culture. The lack of
acknowledgement to their 'emotionality' is yet another strategy (though
seemingly insidious and instinctive) to perpetuate their violence. For:
if the residents of the slums were indeed identified as 'emotionally'
capable they would have to be acknowledged to have capabilities of
'individual' expression, which would then extend to acknowledging their
'collective' identities as well. However this denial of emotionality
does not imply that their 'performance' or 'expression of self' in the
public, or for that matter in their private spaces, is not
unacknowledged. In fact the performance is constantly scrutinized;
however it is not engaged within the framework of expression of 'self'
but as a gross deviance from the 'modern, disciplined and self-governed'
in their infantile, delinquent manner demanding disciplining.

The self of the other is only permitted as much space as the capitalist
modes of productions can accommodate, and that is the fundamental
impediment in the actualisation of the ‘right to the city’ as envisaged
by Lefebvre at the centre of which is an inhabitant who has a solid,
undeniable core which then facilitates ‘encounters’ of democratic,
dialogic, participatory negotiations. To state the obvious, it is not an
easy task, intellectually, culturally, theoretically, socially, to
engage in a discussion about ‘slums or their right to the city’ because
most of these calls are made within the very system – the capitalist
modes of production and negotiations which produce them in the first
instance as Engels pointed in 1872 and which remains still relevant.

This was particularly revealed when during the course of my doctoral
research, my intent and presence was particularly found disconcerting
when I was categorical about the fact that I was not interested in
knowing about their poverty levels but just about themselves; and in all
truthfulness, it was in these encounters and hanging about that
*listening as a methodological framework* had its genesis. Whilst
pursuing the DFID research to examine ‘The Role of ICTs in Poverty
Alleviation’, armed with an questionnaire, I would venture into the
*jhuggis,* with entitlement and no regard for the personal, political,
poetic, privacy positions of the residents to fill out details of their
financial profiles - how much you earn, where do you spend, how much,
why, why not - to essentially determine whether they in fact qualified
as poor enough or not. The poverty - as imagined to be experienced
within the mandate of the project - had to be validated by the poor,
and as always in review discussions later there were doubts raised about
the *authenticity* of their claims, what were they under-reporting, how
to really ‘expose’ them.

Needless to say when I was allowed an opportunity to pursue my own
research intent in the *jhuggis,* even though the questions evaded me, I
was determined in the resolve of not discussing *poverty* with the poor.
The poverty, the deprivations, the limited infrastructural
availabilities were not a *secret* that had to be unravelled. It was
obscenely obvious, and from my political, intellectual position, it was
a bloody insult to the intelligence of the residents to ask them to
spell it out.

Instead I decided to just *listen* into the manner in which the given
conditions and manifestations of deprivations lend and lead to the
experiences within the broader political, emotional, social,
aspirational cosmos which the residents could claim, denied to and
subverted. In and through these acts of everyday practice, I wanted (and
still continue) to insist on that the diverse experiences of *poverty* -
social, financial, political, emotional - impact on the capacity to
claim and enact citizenship as a rightful, legislative, constitutional
right.

The material form in these inquisitions was never-absented, its roofs,
corners, crevices (or lack of thereof) became one of the ways in which
everyday was experienced living in conditions that mark the
infrastructural, emotional, political and social landscape in and within
the lanes of the *jhuggis* in Govindpuri in my works. However, I reflect
now, there was a matter of deliberation and intent - though not
conscious and well articulated - to not insist on the anatomy of the
material form, per se, as its presence was one of the most obvious and
bearing manifestations of the *poverty* that specific discourses and
practices insisted on.

Perhaps it was the keenness to *listen* that also confounded me
regarding the participation and claims of the residents of the slums in
the city that was dramatically transforming towards the Commonwealth
Games, 2010, whilst I was pursuing my doctoral research. The academic
texts and activist discourse were singularly intent on highlighting the
manner in which the transformations were unleashing new politics of
middle-class aesthetics in the city, and in which the slums and its
residents had no place. In retrospect I acknowledge my naivete to reckon
these accounts with absolute veracity of absolute truth. And thus I
approached the residents of the Govindpuri slums with precise critique
and assumed collective indignant response to the devastating fate our
city was being held hostage to. I was *silenced* and *sidelined* on
several occasions, more than a few residents took immense pride and
delight in how their city would become one of the world-class ones, that
there will be roads and infrastructure, and new airports and other
similar facilities to showcase to the world. One of the camps of the
Govindupuri slums, Navjeevan camp, has a very robust market catering to
the construction industry, mostly the scaffolding that is essential in
these enterprises. Commonwealth Games provided them the boost as never
before, both the retailer and the workforce from the slums were not only
proud but announced themselves as significant ‘contributors’ to the
changes the city was witnessing. I am yet to come across any such
assertive expressions of claiming participation in the transformation of
the city from the residents of the slums in the texts, which in fact
rely on ethnographic accounts to make statements about the manner in
which the very slum-dwellers appear as passive agents.

There are tactics of complicity, duplicity and possibilities of
‘inter-liveability’ on which these relationships are precariously and
delicately balanced. Here, the conceptual framing of ‘people as
infrastructure’ by AbdouMaliq Simone while discussing the inner city of
Johannesburg in the context of racial tensions in a volatile,
transforming city holds particular relevance. In this formulation:

> Ways of doing and representing things become increasingly ‘conversant’
> with one another. They participate in a diversifying series of
> reciprocal exchanges, so that positions and identities are not fixed
> or even, at most times, determinable. These ‘urbanized’ relations
> reflect neither the dominance of a narrative or linguistic structure
> nor a chaotic, primordial mix.[^9_7]

In mapping the diverse, overlapping and intersecting networks,
modalities and landscapes of living precariously, there is an urgent
need to engage, expose and arrive at the ‘traumatic core’ of the
tensions underlying it. This is not merely an ambitious,
well-intentioned, romantic agenda. In my reckoning, only the task of
revealing these densities, connections and intersections of living with
conditions of precariousness will highlight the real, banal of the
‘other’ which is systematically absented and invisibilized by the state
and other hegemonic narratives. The absence of such engagement often
leads to these communities being caught in another kind of totalizing
Borgesian–Kafkaesque narrative without any scope of liberation. The
image of the ‘other’ as precarious can only be disrupted by demolishing
the myths and representations of the distancing and othering it is
predicated on. The demystification of the ‘other’, by highlighting the
structural, systemic and material conditions which produce the
conditions for this othering in the first place, then announces itself
as the political project which researchers across disciplines ought to
align themselves to.

Slums are representative spaces of what the city ‘ought not to’.
However, an equally persistent, subtle threat is of the city turning
into a colossal slum, given the rate of development, population
increase, and lack of infrastructural facilities. In that sense, slums
stand out as a demonic, prophetic instance of ‘*what could be*’ but
‘*ought not to be*’.

A paternalistic disciplining agenda is inherent to these narratives
which is symptomatic of the broader anxiety of the dominant structures
and narratives to allow for emotionality, and thus an identification of
a well-defined and claimed sense of ‘self’ to the marginalized spaces
and communities. Slums are heterotopic spaces in the city. They are both
dreaded and desired. The former for its 'potential' to disrupt the
fundamental core of social-moral values owing to the imaginations it
evokes on account of its density, dirt, and digressions – social,
cultural and moral. And it is within this dreaded potentiality for
digressions lies its perverse desire.

However this desire rarely translates into a direct engagement with the
space, but manifests itself in the hyperbolic interest in situating the
position of the slums in the 'present' of the city. Slums are
strategically denied a 'self' as it allows them to accommodate the
anxiety about their 'otherness' across political, intellectual, social,
cultural and, indeed, emotional manifestations. In its most fundamental
aspect it completely disenfranchises slums of any 'identity' and thus
its assertion. It systematically limits their 'right to the city'. This
fundamental disenfranchisement further extends into denying the slums
and its residents the possibility to imagine an (or any) other. The
denial of the 'self' of the slums in discursive spaces, middle-class
imagination and mainstream representation is then logically extended to
unacknowledging any 'emotional' capacity or its performance,
emotionality. This double denial, first of the 'self' of the slums and
then the possibility of othering by the other translates not only in
immediate disenfranchisement, but also significantly allows for the
displacement of the marginalized both in the historical and futuristic
imagination of the urban. The peculiarity of the suspended displacement
in the imagination of the state is not incidental, but strategic. It
owing to this suspension that the demolition, displacement or the
violence inflicted on the slums finds justification as it is understood
that they neither have any historicity nor any future claims to the
memory and culture of the space they inhabit. That until ‘re-settled’ by
the state, they exist in a void.

The right to the city for those on the margins ought to manifest in
their capacities to reject the city without the fear, threat and/or
violence of being expunged. For this relationship between the hegemonic
forces and the marginalised to be premised on a non-negotiable pact of
neither imposing or nor insisting on displacement. To reckon of this
relationship as a love affair wherein the lover and the loved with,
without, besides and in spite of any disruptions have and do accommodate
the other. Accommodation has to be the critical factor here, to be able
to throw a sulk, hide in a corner, turn your head away but not throw the
tantrum of expunging the lover (or loved). In this analogy at varying
times, the loved one is representative of the hegemonic forces, and
whilst the lover retains the power to alleviate the status of the
former, its position is still shrouded in precarity. For the
marginalised to walk recklessly the streets with the swagger in the hips
of the confidence that none can halt us.

And thus, if indeed the self of the slums were recognised, and if in the
hegemonic forces in the manner of an entitled lord in *The High Bid*,
the play from which the title of this talks draws from, inquires of a
valet he fancies, ‘to whom do you “beautifully” belong?’[^9_8] And thus
divesting the valet in the play and the slums in the city of any sense
of ‘self’ and only acknowledging them as propertied entities to be
exchange hands, one imagines slums respond resoundingly:

Do I contradict myself?
<br/>Very well then I contradict myself;
<br/>(I am large, I contain multitudes.)[^9_9]

##References
Althusser, Louis. *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings: 1978-1987,* G.M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron
(eds) New York: Verso, 2006.

Gunn, Thom. *Jamesian*, http://psa.fcny.org/psa/poetry/poetry\_in\_motion/atlas/atlanta/jamesian/.

James, Henry. *The High Bid.*

Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City’, *New Left Review,*
September-October 2008,
https://newleftreview.org/issues/II53/articles/david-harvey-the-right-to-the-city.

Lefebvre, Henri. *The Production of Space*, trans. D. Nicholson-Smith,
Oxford: Blackwell, 1991 (1974), p. 422.

Simone, AbdouMaliq. ‘People as Infrastructure: Intersecting Fragments in
Johannesburg’, *Public Culture*, 16.3 (2004): 407–429.

Whitman, Walt. ‘Song of Myself, 51’, in D. McKay, *Leaves of Grass,*
1900.

Zizek, Slavoj. ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the
Stalinist Show Trials’, Olin Auditorium, Bard College, 16 November,
1999.

[^9_1]: Thom Gunn, *Jamesian,* http://psa.fcny.org/psa/poetry/poetry\_in\_motion/atlas/atlanta/jamesian/.

[^9_2]: Slavoj Žižek, ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the Stalinist Show Trials’, Olin Auditorium, Bard College, 16 November, 1999.

[^9_3]: Henri Lefebvre, *The Production of Space*, trans. D. Nicholson-Smith, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991 (1974), p. 422.

[^9_4]: David Harvey, ‘The Right to the City’, *New Left Review,* September-October 2008, https://newleftreview.org/issues/II53/articles/david-harvey-the-right-to-the-city.

[^9_5]: Louis Althusser, *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings: 1978-1987*, G.M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron (eds) New York: Verso, 2006.

[^9_6]: Section 376 under Indian Penal Code is punishment for rape, which if reported by a woman - particularly after the 2011 Delhi Rape incident, the police authorities have to take immediate action against the accused

[^9_7]: AbdouMaliq Simone, ‘People as Infrastructure: Intersecting Fragments in Johannesburg’, *Public Culture*, 16.3 (2004): 407–429.

[^9_8]: Henry James, *The High Bid.*

[^9_9]: Walt Whitman, *Song of Myself,* 51.