
#Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri
By Tripta Chandola


# Colophon

Theory on Demand \#36
<br/>**Listening into Others: An Ethnographic Exploration in Govindpuri**

Author: Tripta Chandola

Editing: Geert Lovink and Sepp Eckenhaussen
<br/>Supervision of previous versions: Dr. Jo Tacchi and Dr. Christy Collis
<br/>Production: Sepp Eckenhaussen
<br/>Cover design: Katja van Stiphout

Publisher: Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2020
<br/>ISBN 978-94-92302-59-5

**Contact**
<br/>Institute of Network Cultures
<br/>Phone: +31 20 5951865
<br/>Email: <info@networkcultures.org>
<br/>Web: <http://www.networkcultures.org>

This publication is available through various print on demand services.
EPUB and PDF editions are freely downloadable from our website:
[http://www.networkcultures.org/publications/](http://www.networkcultures.org/publications/#deeppockets)

This publication is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA
4.0)



# Contents

<a href="ch004.xhtml">Preface: For Bitiya</a>

<a href="ch005.xhtml">How to Use the Book</a>

<a href="ch006.xhtml">Fact Sheet</a>

<a href="ch007.xhtml">1\. In Search of the Never-lost Slums: Ethnography of an Ethnographer</a>

<a href="ch008.xhtml">2\. Listening: An Ethnographic Exploration</a>

<a href="ch009.xhtml">3\. An ‘Obscene’ Calling
Emotionality in/of Marginalized Spaces: A Listening of/into ‘Abusive’
Women in Govindpuri</a>

<a href="ch010.xhtml">4\. The Subaltern as a Political ‘Voyeur’?</a>

<a href="ch011.xhtml">5\. Collaborative Listening: On Producing a Radio Documentary in the
Govindpuri Slums - *With Tom Rice*</a>

<a href="ch012.xhtml">6\. I Wail, Therefore I Am</a>

<a href="ch013.xhtml">7\. Sonic Selfies: Equalizing the Encounter with the Other *- In
Conversation with Jodi Dean and Geert Lovink*</a>

<a href="ch014.xhtml">8\. Revisiting the Housing Question</a>

<a href="ch015.xhtml">9\. To Whom Do You ‘Beautifully’ Belong?: The Slums’ Response (If Indeed
They Were Allowed the Tongues): Or, The Rite of Passage to the Right
to the City: But, Where Is the Self of the Slums?</a>

<a href="ch016.xhtml">10\. The Shriek: A Poetic Interlude</a>

<a href="ch017.xhtml">Bibliography</a>


# Preface: For Bitiya 

> Things last longer than men. Who can say whether the story ends here;
> who can say they will never meet again. – J.L. Borges, The Encounter.

In a flat city, or flattened by the many who walk it, the hilltop of an
illusion allowed for a sense of height and depth. It was a clear, early
winter morning, and I was looking at my crisp best, dressed as the jaded
travelers are: collar-down coat, black of course, a roll-on case with no
untidy edges and a distant look. However I was not yet at the airport.
It was not only the look that was distant, but the look that had
rendered a distance to everything immediate – as is a tactic with those
who spend hours in the in-between spaces (of the airports), dreaming (or
obversely, dreading) of faraway lands.

The reverie was broken by the announcement of a white van with blaring
red lights. I was starkly reminded of where I was; blame it on the
cinematographer’s abuse, I had imagined a more dramatic setting.

I was at the entrance of the Safdarjung Mortuary awaiting Bitiya to
arrive. We had serious business of the dead for the living to resolve.
She was always on her way, never on time. And I found myself distracted
from the matters at hand to one hot, summer afternoon years back.

In those times I was an earnest researcher in search of the subjects in
the lanes of Govindpuri. I was led into a tiny room, thick with
darkness. It was a relief, even though it took me a couple of minutes to
find my bearings and the faces of the people present. A huge wooden bed
was the only furniture occupying most of the space in this six by four
feet room. On it lay a young woman about whom the first thing I remember
is her hair; they were spread out like sleeping rivers. The presence did
not need any announcement. Baby, my companion, introduced me to an older
woman who was squatting at one end of the bed. She was the lying young
woman's mother, Salma. Between the two of them, mostly the lying woman,
there was very little space on the bed to offer me a seat. She was
nudged. Her stillness was absolute. Baby in a high pitched tone informed
her that I was there to interview people about their lives; that I was
interested in hearing it all. A spark struck. She turned around, though
still lying, shifting towards the wall to make space for me, reached for
my hand, sat me next to her, and without any courtesies of formal
introductions or establishing the intent of my so-said questioning, set
out on her soliloquy; my hand merely a prop. For the next hour, and then
some, she narrated at length, at once despairing and delighted, about
her affair with her lover, Bitiya, of last seven years with whom she
recently had yet another altercation.

Her performance was relentless. The interruptions of tea being made in
one corner of the room, served and partaken; first, Baby and then Salma
excusing themselves on account of reaching their respective place of
work as domestic workers, did not deter her. Before leaving, both, Baby
and Salma, had tried to intervene and disrupt the performance in which
they reckoned I was entrapped as an unwilling audience. In continuing to
allow her to hold my hand I assured the two departing women that no
coercion was being exercised; they had eventually left, slightly
bemused. And thus it was the lying young woman, who had by now gathered
herself in a squat, her spread out hair and sparkling eyes.

In spite of the agonies of her affair, every once so often she would
break into a childlike enthusiasm about the accessories I was carrying:
my bag, the pouch in which I carried my rolling tobacco and the perfect
cigarette I was rolling. Half an hour later I had to bid her farewell to
keep another appointment. It finally dawned upon her that no formal
introductions had been made: She introduced herself, Bitiya. And asked
the intent of my visits. I told her. Before I departed she once again
reached out to my hand and sought a promise: “You are writing the story
of this place, right? Will you write about my love story? I want the
world to know that no one can love like me”. I told her there were many
other stories I had to consider as well, but of course I will. She left
me standing at her porch, her hair swaying, loudly announcing after me
that I should make my next visit soon; she hadn't told me anything yet.

That afternoon was almost a decade back. But in the now and here, Bitiya
had arrived, effervescent, her brown-eyes sparkling ahead of her and
slight jump in her walk. Considering the matter at hand, I wanted to
reach out to her and seek apology for not having accompanied her here
when she had to come the first time: two-years back in the middle of the
night and eight-months pregnant. But together we had seen, felt and
grown enough to know that such courtesies were not required between us.
Of course notwithstanding the situation and the setting, Bitiya remarked
on the tardiness of my roll-on case, which she later did take to pack to
her satisfaction.

The first time, in the middle of the night, Bitiya was accompanying
Dimpy’s – the love of her life - brutally stabbed dead-body to the
morgue. Having heard her wail on the phone, I had not the courage to be
there for her then. But in the now and here, we were at the office which
maintained the records to claim what Bitiya reckoned was rightfully
hers: the dead-man’s name as hers.

As the tales of listening into the others, but not the task of it, folds
onto itself, Bitiya and I have a web of the etching of the lanes of the
Govindpuri slums, where we laughed, loved, fought, cried, mourned and
steadfastly held on to each other, bearing its testimonies on ourselves,
poetics and politics. We also have a seven-year old between us, Myshkin,
who is putting us to the task of compelling and challenging the practice
of our politics, a battle which we had reckoned we had already won. He
is our anchor, ensuring that for no seductions and sirens shall we let
our politics and poetics of our practice be compromised.

बितिया येह तेरे लिये: \[Bitiya, this is for you\]

*तुम मेरी नग्मा,*

*कोना और आगर हो,*

*सन्न्न्तत्, शोर और सेहर *

*Postscript: *

As I shared these recollections with Bitiya, she claimed the book by
demanding that an inscription of her own to be inserted for Dimpy, the
love of her life, ‘*I miss you, Dimpy’.*



#Introduction: How to Use the Book

This book is an invitation to listen into the everyday lives of the
Govindpuri slums listened into over a span of almost two-decades. Slums
lie on the margins of the state and society. However, unpacking the
casual spatial/geographical reference is integral to locating the
position of the slums in the city as it is revealing of the complex
materialities and modalities of executing this marginalisation. More
often than not, slums do not geographically lie on the margins of the
city; in fact, historically, across continents, cities and cultures, the
growth and evolution of the slums is intricately linked with the
development of the cities, and thus, more often than not, they are
located in the heart of the city. And it is precisely this centered-ness
of the slums in the city which causes anxiety between the two entities –
geographically, historically, theoretically and in the everyday
practice. The centrality and visibility of the slums is after all a
stark reminder that the 'modern, world-class' city around it is not a
result of the fantastic imagination of the precious few, who have access
to the glittering city, but rests on the histories of efforts and
exploitation of the many who only experience it in its cold, clinical
reality of steel and mortar structures.The presence of the slums in the
city is undeniable, solid, and typically evokes strong reactions. Most
city-dwellers harbour the sentiment that the reality of the everyday of
the slums is in ‘any respect unfit for human habitation’ and that slums
‘are detrimental to safety, health and morals’.[^htu_1]

The essays in this book intend to enliven the lives and practices of
living in the slums beyond these simplistic, distant assertions by
undertaking the task of ‘tuning the ears’. These imaginations of the
slums, arising from a limited, tenuous and more often than not biased
engagement with their reality, is what populates the intellectual and
political environment from which issue the multiple institutional
investments in the city, including urban development policies, legal
actions and political priorities, as well as the social–cultural
responses to the slums and its residents. The protagonists of this book
are the residents of the slums of Govindpuri. The book begins with the
assertion and acknowledgment that slums are unsettling sights in the
city. In this case the city of New Delhi; but in any city its slums are,
metaphorically, testimonies of its unsettlement. Yes, slums are indeed
unsettling sights. They are dirty and congested. The houses, permanent
and semi-permanent, appear to have no logic, each being incestuously
woven with its neighbours, and the dwellings from a distance seem to be
precariously balanced on the edge of a precipice.

The book, however, takes issue with the category of assertions made in
expensively produced official reports and by the mainstream media. These
are the same assertions made loudly and sanctimoniously by the city's
middle classes. To wit, that the living conditions of slums, that make
them unsettling sights, are also the making of their inhabitants. The
book unveils the ‘anxiety of proximity’ that fundamentally informs where
the slums are in the city's present, but also where they will be in its
past and future — geographically, politically, philosophically,
socially, culturally and imaginatively.[^htu_2] Besides the denial of
structural and systemic rights, and the othering of their residents,
this signification of the slums also denies them a position in the
history of the city itself, and thus denies them their own histories.

By insisting on the *listening,* and engaging with the everyday lives in
the slums through its soundscapes, the narratives here highlight the
creative, contested and political manner in which the marginalized
negotiate the multiplicities of urban living, revealing their selves and
their others, instead of only being regarded as the other. These
experiences reveal that the slums-dwellers not only exercise a strict
code of conduct to engage with others within the settlement based on
caste, communal, gender and moral, amongst other considerations.
Moreover, the slum-dwellers identify the city and its middle classes as
their others, using similar vocabularies and frameworks to those used by
the mainstream to other slum-dwellers. In doing so, the book inserts
parallel and alternative narratives of the engagement of the urban poor
with the hegemonic networks. These negotiations highlight the
intersections and overlaps of lives on the margins with the existing
formal structures and networks.

Whilst a key focus of the book is to insist on the self of the residents
of the slums as it expresses itself in and through sonic assertions, the
book critically sets the everyday negotiations of the residents of the
Govindpuri slums against the discourse of othering and violence that
they encounter. The book begins with the dual premise that slums are
othered spaces and that their residents encounter othering and violence
at an everyday and structural level in the city. The disenfranchisement
and marginalisation of the residents of the slums, and thus their
limited claim on the ‘right to the city’, are in fact the starting point
for this book. The spectres of precarity, illegality and limitation
haunt the past, present and future of slums in the city. Following
Judith Butler, the book recognises that the structural and systemic
denial of ‘social and economic support, housing, health care,
employment, rights of political expression, forms of social recognition,
and conditions of political agency’ persist because *slums* are
considered ‘un-liveable’ and the lives of its residents
‘un-grievable'.[^htu_3] As much as it is the intent of the book to portray
the space and every day of the Govindpuri slums, its task is steadfastly
to unfold the macro-political, theoretical and intellectual agenda at
work around ‘the slum’ and to rehabilitate slums as, in fact, ‘liveable’
spaces where lives are ‘grievable’.[^htu_4]

The book has been almost two-decades in the making. During this time, I
have been immersively embedded in the emotional, political, social,
economic and cultural landscapes of the slums. At this juncture of
reckoning of sorts, the book is as much about the residents as it is
about its interlocutor, the ethnographer. During this time, I have spent
more afternoons and evenings in the Govindpuri slums than any other
place in the city. The Govindpuri slums have at once been a space which
made me question assumptions about self, other, being: an ongoing
research engagement; the site of my doctoral thesis; but most
significantly, a space whose particular and peculiar materiality,
enlivened by the lives of those who inhabit it has shaped and refined my
politics and poetics. At the risk of compromising objectivity and
exposing sentimentality, I have no hesitation in admitting that in the
lanes, intersections, corners, roof tops, carefully organised meagre
houses and amongst people living precarious lives, I feel at home, a
sense of belonging and becoming. It is a matter of deliberation – a
political act, if you must – for me, as an ethnographer, to not only
remain inserted and immersed in the stories of lives from the slums*,*
but also not to retrospectively extend a sophistication of intent and
agenda in the engagements that were sustained. But most importantly in
retaining the anxiousness, the intent is to insist on the *messiness* of
the researcher-researched encounters, especially when this relationship
is predicated within the precise mainstream-marginalised \(middle-class
researcher and slum residents as the researched\) positionality which
the book questions and attempts to reflect on, if not alternate but
simultaneous negotiating possibilities within this praxis.

Following Foucault, I locate transgressions as the enactments of
challenging the boundaries.[^htu_5] When performed, claimed and enacted on
the margins and by the marginalised the *transgressive acts* do not
simply remain a matter of furthering one’s horizons, in more ways than
one. Here, these *transgressive acts* assume a political and poetic
currency as inherent in and to these acts is the possibility of an
alternative, or at least a simultaneity, of, with and within the
normative discourses and practices. In that, underlying the perusal of
the narratives and experiences from the slums is taking into cognizance
the complexities and the upsetting, de-stabilising and disruptive
capacities of the *transgressive acts.* Here the intent is to unveil the
'text-ility' of the texts (those instituting the dominant narratives,
others offering critique, alternatives and affirmations, and the lived
realities) to attempting a suturing, ‘as in invisible mending’ to weave
the multiplicities of the reality of the 'real' and its 'myth' not in a
linearly progressing narrative structure culminating in a neat
resolution, but precisely to disrupt and displace the epistemological,
political and cultural practices which attempt to distil (and thus
consolidate) these complexities into a perverse static singularity of a
problem to be met with a definite set of solutions.[^htu_6]

In the meanderings of the essays in the book, whether this ambitious
task has even barely achieved its agenda and intent remains to be seen.
However in these meanderings, at first intuitively and then with more
theoretical and political mandate, the intent has been as outlined by
Spivak ‘to make the anthropologist construct her object as a teacher for
a different end, learn to learn from below, from the subaltern, rather
than only study him (her) \[...\] Not to study the subaltern, but to
learn’.[^htu_7]

In these essays, I make the point for listening as methodological
framework, political intervention and poetic expression to ‘learn to
learn from below’ and expose the dense multiplicities and lifeworlds of
the subaltern employing the grammar and vocabularies as articulated by
them, instead of rendering the experiences from below into explicable
phenomenon within the hegemonic narrative.

The essay *In Search of the Never-lost Slums* explores the potential of
the transgressive working of the hyphen to actualize the project of
‘learn to learn from below. At the risk of exposing the limitations of
my own research practice and praxis, which should not be an
embarrassment but an acknowledgement of the learning from below, I
discuss at length the anxiety of undertaking research in the slums,
outside of my middle-class comfort zones of convenient theories and
frameworks. The essay intends to rupture the revered position of the
anthropologist and the ethnographer as a neutral, apolitical observer.
In the essay, *Listening: An Ethnographic Exploration*, I propose
listening as a methodological framework to first and foremost ‘learning’
from below but also to insist on listening as a critical imperative in
acknowledging the ‘self’ of the others, here the residents of the slums.
I thus listen into the listening of the self from within the interiority
of the slums.

The essays *An Obscene Calling* and *The Subaltern as a Political
Voyeur* put to task listening as a methodological framework. In the
former, the anxiety, perils, tumultuous terrains of the experience,
experiencing and expressions of love and loving through the narratives
of Baby and Bitiya. Inscribed on their selves – bodily, emotionally,
spatially and socially – is the double whammy of othering as woman and
as residents of the slums. These inscriptions, I argue, for the
subaltern, those on the margins have the consequences of their
emotionality and thus the selves remaining unacknowledged. In *The
Subaltern as Political Voyeur* I present the listening into the
political lifeworlds of the residents of the slums. This essay is
dedicated to the memories and learning from Saroj, who passed away a few
years back. The conversation with Tom Rice is an attempt to further the
disciplinary boundaries and practice of listening as a research
framework and the potential of soundscapes to engage with lifeworlds
particularly of with those on the margins and whose ‘self’ remains
unacknowledged within the hegemonic modalities of knowledge production.

Listening as a methodology necessitates, first and foremost, the muting
of the hegemonic self. As a political intervention, it demands the
ontological praxis for the *others* to listen into their *self,* and
that this *listening* accrues the validity and veracity of and as robust
knowledge-systems within which when the *other* speaks, it is not
reckoned to be in tongues. The denial of the *listening(s)* onto/into
themselves, the hegemonic self intends to ‘neutralize listening within
himself, so that he cannot philosophize’ having thus denied the others
most fundamental claims to the structure of the self, the hegemonic self
then extends its willing ears - insists that it is *all ears* which in
fact ‘belongs to a register of philanthropic oversensitivity, where
condescension resounds alongside good intentions; thus it often has a
pious ring to it’.

In insisting on the *listening(s)* by the others of their other, the
essays in the book attempt to engage in the politics and praxis of
*othering* as practiced by the identified others. It is in the processes
and practices of *othering* that the self of the other is to be
recognised. In the othering, as is evidenced by the manner in which the
hegemonic self encapsulates the complexity of the others into a
singularity solely premised on the former’s reflexive and referential
*listening* of the latter, the others’ landscapes of reflexive and
referential of making meaning of the self are to be unveiled.

The book ends with a few provocations towards this mandate. In a
displaced dialogue with Jodi Dean and Geert Lovink, I discuss the
possibilities of technologically mediated possibilities of ‘equalizing
the encounter with the others’ in *Sonic Selfies.* In *I Wail, Thus I
am*, the disruption to the hetero-normative, hegemonic narratives,
however temporarily, the sonic assertion of wailing women create. In
*Revisiting The Housing Questions* and *To Who Do You Beautifully
Belong,* I locate the denial of the self and silencing of the
slum-dweller in the hegemonic narratives and imaginations as being both
strategic and an impediment to actualize the project of the ‘right to
the city’. *The Shriek* is a poetic interlude awaiting the presences of
the identified others to be listened into.

Thus the essays in the book, recognize and insist that that *slums* are
not anathema to the city, whether one speaks of the city’s history or
its present or future. Rather, that the *slums* as civic and social
spaces are in fact a by-product of the violent, inequitable and
exploitative processes of urbanisation. Through these essays the intent
then is to act in whatever limited way to encourage the ethics of
cohabitation across spaces, communities and ideas between spaces as the
slums and its middle-class neighbours. And lastly, to provide a response
to the everyday othering of the slum-dwellers by ‘listening to, and
recording, the details of the story the other might tell, letting that
story become part of an undeniable archive, the enduring trace of loss
that compels the ongoing obligations to mourn’.[^htu_8]

And thus the sounds of the ethnographic lives, of the *Others* I engaged
with and the *Self* as their interlocutor slowly start humming.

From where you are, listen with me.

##References
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. ‘Scattered Speculations on the Subaltern
and the Popular’, *Postcolonial Studies* 8.4 (2005): 475-486.

[^htu_1]: The *Slums Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act* (1956) declares an area as a slum when the buildings: (a) are in any respect unfit for human habitation; or (b) are by reason of dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty arrangement and design of such buildings, narrowness or faulty arrangement of streets, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or any combination of these factors, are detrimental to safety, health or morals.

[^htu_2]: Slavoj Žižek, ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the Stalinist Show Trials’, *Olin Auditorium, Bard College,* 16 November, 1999.

[^htu_3]: Judith Butler, *Notes Towards a Performative Theory of Assembly,* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015, p. 198.

[^htu_4]: Butler further elaborates that within specific constructions 'life is established as tenuous, precarious, and in that sense not worthy to be protected from injury or loss, and so not grievable' (198) and raises questions of biopolitical import as, 'Whose lives matter? Whose lives do not matter as lives, are not recognizable as living, or count only ambiguously as alive?' (196).

[^htu_5]: Michael Foucault, ‘A Preface to Transgression’, trans. Donald Bouchard and Sherry Simon, in Donald Bouchard (ed.) *Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews,* Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP I977.

[^htu_6]: Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, ‘Scattered speculations on the subaltern and the popular’, *Postcolonial studies* 8.4 (2005):483

[^htu_7]: Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, ‘Scattered speculations on the subaltern and the popular’, *Postcolonial studies. *

[^htu_8]: Judith Butler, *Notes Towards a Performative Theory of Assembly,* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015, pp 202.



#Fact Sheet

## The Matters of Definition

The Slum Areas Act, 1956, act declares slums areas as settlements which
‘\[…\] by reason of dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty arrangement and
design of such buildings, narrowness or faulty arrangement of streets,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or any combination
of these factors, are detrimental to safety, health or morals’.[^fs_1] In
Hindi, the slums are translated as *jhuggis* and *jhoparis*. The
official departments as the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board
(DUSIB) and Delhi Development Authority’s (DDA) Slum and *Jhuggi
Jhopari* Rehabilitation extend the official designation, recognition and
nomenclature to slums as such. Collectively and popularly referred to as
the Govindpuri *jhuggis*, the settlement I am concerned with in this
book is located in South Delhi and consists of three different camps:
Jawaharlal Nehru Camp (referred to as abbreviated Nehru Camp in everyday
use, and the nomenclature followed in the book), Navjeevan Camp, and
Bhumiheen Camp. Adjoining the jhuggis is an authorised, legal colony
known as Govindpuri, from whose referential location the camps also
acquire their name in the popular usage. The three camps fall under the
Kalkaji constituency, which is one of the seventy Vidhan Sabha
(Legislative Assembly) constituencies of the National Capital Territory.[^fs_2]
The total area the slums cover is 103896 sq m (Nehru and Navjeevan
camp=103896 sq m and Bhumiheen camp =35156 sq m) with 6706 households
(Nehru and Navjeevan Camp = 4578 and Bhumhiheen camp = 2128) in the
three camps, according to the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board List
of 675 JJ (Jhuggi Jhopdi) Bastis.[^fs_3]

The official definitions of the slums enters the everyday imagination
and translations in such a manner that the structural factors are
employed to exert practices of othering on the residents of the jhuggis,
with implications of social, physical, cultural, financial, emotional
and political discrimination, denial of agency, and claims and rights as
citizens. And thus residing in a jhuggi and thus being a jhuggi-walah,
slum-dweller, significantly limits the spaces, services and rights one
can claim in the city. Throughout the course of the essays, particularly
when insisting or highlighting the narratives and experiences of the
residents, I use the self-identified term which is either jhuggis or the
specific camps to refer to their homes, which also marks their official
addresses. In their usage, jhuggi, first and foremost, is the site and
space of their settlement, habitation and belonging. When used in
singular usage, jhuggi refers to a house, when evoked in the plural,
jhuggis, it is in the collective sense of referring to the entire
settlement. Whilst I do acknowledge that the inherent othering which the
‘naming’ is laden which needs to be dissipated, I also remain astutely
cognizant of the fact that whilst dealing with the issues of rights
(particularly in regards to demanding judicial interventions, by the way
of stay order on sudden, and often violent, demolitions and evictions,
but also claims to resettlement in case of such a predicament and other
services) the evocation of this particular ‘naming’ - slums, and its
associated disenfranchisement, also accrues weight and validity to the
arguments.

In the essays, I use the terms of slums and jhuggis interchangeably,
without laden prejudices and politics of othering. As deems most
suitable to the particular narrating of experience and experiencing, I
also either refer to the camps in their specificity or to the collective
of the slums, which I often choose to take the liberty of referring to
the ‘slums of Govindpuri’ and for the sake of convenience also
abbreviate to GP.

Unless asked or agreed upon threat perceived, the names of individuals,
groups and communities in the essays have not been anonymized. The
decision to be known, written and referred to by their real names was in
deliberation with the residents of the slums, and should be insisted on
as a position of self-assertion by the slum-dwellers. Whilst conducting
my doctoral research to fulfil the criterion of meeting with all the
rules and regulations of the ethics committee, I had to seek consent
from the people I was interviewing and hanging about. One of the
assurances I had to extend amounted to ensuring that their ‘names will
be anonymized, and their identities not be revealed so as to not invite
any harm towards them’. I always found making introductions or following
the intense conversations about one’s lives with the clause of anonymity
rather trite and lacking in merit of truth. During one of such
conversation, when I was repeating the whole consent form for the
benefit of the recorder and to record the participant’s response as a
record of her consent (the verbal, record consent had to be sought as
most of the participants were not formally educated and the literate,
written compulsions needed to be circumvented), a fiery woman in her 30s
lashed out at me, however lovingly, to say, ‘we are telling our stories
because we want them to be told. What is this nonsense of not writing
our real names, I want the world to know this is who I am and this is
what I think. And don’t worry about our safety, it is my challenge to
anyone from, use my name and if you have the gumption, find me in these
lanes. And if you do find me, I will be here to take you on’.

Since then I have followed the wisdom and claiming of not only one’s
lifeworlds and spaces these are unfolded within and only annonymized
names when have been asked for. I do however leave out the address
within the lanes of the slums of Govindpuri, almost in perverse
pleasure, for someone to take on the fiery woman’s challenge of finding
them with the name as a maker in these lanes and take her own.

## The Spread of and around the Slums of Govindpuri 

In the map, the slums of Govindpuri are marked out in red, defining their boundaries. For those
venturing into this space via this aerial, zoomed out perspective, if
the slums appear like a patch-work pattern weaving into the broader
spread of the neighbourhood that is because they are. GuruRavidas Marg
is the main arterial road along which the slums are located, which leads
towards Tughlakabad Extension on one end and at the intersection of
another main arterial road, Ma Anandmayi Marg, lies the Govindpuri Metro
Station. The Govindpuri Metro station was opened in 2010 to coincide
with the inauguration of the Commonwealth Games. It falls on the violet
line of the coloured-code Delhi Metro Map.

In my initial years of conducting research in the slums, I rarely used
the public transport systems. The buses were erratic and demanded long
waits and longer, convoluted routes to where I lived in the city, in its
Northern end. I either used auto-rickshaws or made use of my then
partner’s bartered old red Maruti. In fact it is only in the last few
years after the connectivity of Govindpuri Metro with other
intersections were operationalized that I have started using the metro
service regularly. To avoid making a knee-jerk acquaintance with the
slums of Govindpuri, I propose a walk from the Govindpuri Metro Station
wading through the neighbourhoods of the slums to insist that in their
make, materiality and markets the slums are woven into the spread out
the larger settlement, perhaps as a patchwork, but still held together
by the fine threads of shared histories, spaces, contestations and
alliances.

At the intersection, as one sets about on the GuruRavidas Marg towards
the slums, across from the metro station, stands the Masjid Govindpuri.
In my initial days of researching, I had created my own mapping of the
neighbourhood depending on the availability of and access to toilets,
especially if I were on a rare chance was using the public transport
system. Adjoining the mosque, facing the main road, is a workshop which
specializes in amplifying horns volumes, tunes and sounds for different
vehicles. Tom Rice and I interviewed him for the BBC documentary
Govindpuri Sounds, and even though it has been a years (2013)
and I do not recall much of the conversations, but the sounds of the
amplified horns and the man’s delight in giving us a demonstration and
our own pleasure in it seem like an afternoon from yesterday.[^fs_4] Alongside
the road, on both sides, push-cart eateries offering all kinds of
street-food indulgences are offered and of course tea-stalls. Here, I
often make pit-stop for the snack, tea and smokes. Next to the metro
station, on the GuruRavidas Marg, is a small settlement of about 30
families displaced and evicted from settlements in the city. The main
preoccupation is playing drums, *dhol,* at social and cultural events,
and are colloquially referred to as the *Dhol Basti*. Considering the
eviction and the subsequent settlement here happened fairly recently
(post 2010, the exact year is not known to me), the settlement is not
registered in the list of slums and JJ clusters and thus not eligible
for any resettlement claims.[^fs_5] Even though in the few years since the
settlement started forming its bearing here, I have interacted with a
few of its residents, mostly children, hanging about the roadside and
during my snack/smoke/tea breaks I have never conducted deliberate
research here.

Giri Nagar is the first marked out residential area which falls on this
route. The development of this neighbourhood witnessed sustained growth
from the mid-1960s when Okhala Industrial Area for small and medium
scale industries operationalized and started drawing traction. At the
following intersection, down this road, where an inner road cuts
through, starts sprawling the neighbourhood of Govindpuri from whose
referential proximity the slums draw their colloquial name as a
collective. Govindpuri is a mix of middle-class, lower and working
class, and a high migrant labour rental residential population. It is
marked out along 16 parallel, intersecting *galis* (literally, lanes)
with residential quarters and building across the lanes. Govindpuri has
witnesses resettlement in phases, first post-1971, India Bangladesh war,
and 1984, post the assassination of the then prime minister, Indira
Gandhi, and the riots targetting the Skih community that followed. Owing
to its proximity to Okhala Industrial Area and Nehru Place, from the
early 70s, Govindpuri emerged as a strong hub and neighbourhood for the
emergence of small-scale industries running out semi-residential until
2000 when Supreme Court ordered the closure and relocation of all
‘non-conforming industries’ operating in the urban area of Delhi.[^fs_6]
The combined pull factors of availability of jobs and cheap rental
arrangements, along with the overwhelming prospect of hacking it out in
the city, significantly contributed to drawing migrants from across the
country, particularly its northern states – Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan - here.

At the intersection of GuruRavidas and Baba Fatehsingh road, lie the
slums of Govindpuri. Opposite the fifteenth street, across the road, is
the encroached Govindpuri - slums of Govindpuri, as they are termed in
popular usage. Nehru camp is the first camp on this layout, followed by
Navjeevan camp and separated by a drain, which in the present day is not
easily visible. Across Govindpuri, and its 16 lanes, lies the
middle-class settlement, Kalkaji and its extension, leading all the way
up to the DDA flats in Kalkaji opposite to Bhumhiheen camp in the slums.
On that route, pursuing the Ma Anandmayi Road, at the intersection from
the DDA flats of Kalkaji on one side and Bhumhiheen camp on the other,
the Tuglagabad Extension neighbourhood is marked out.

Amongst the residents of Govindpuri and the slums, more immediate,
authorized markers are used to refer to the three camps. While the Nehru
camp camp and Navjeevan camp are the slums *of* Govindpuri, Bhumhiheen
camp is evoked in reference to the slum *of* Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) flats, as this camp is opposite these flats. Pooja Masala,
something of a landmark of a grocery store falling along the Kalkaji
Extension neighbourhood, is a common reference and meeting point for the
residents of the slums and the neigbourhoods. Pooja Masala, as a
landmark, is evoked to map spatial, temporal and social markers: *I am
15 minutes away from Pooja Masala; the lane into the jhuggis bank
opposite Pooja Masala is where I will be waiting for you;* and, *she is
doing well for herself, now she has rented an apartment only a few lanes
away from Pooja Masala.*

Nehru camp was one of the first slums in the area: as mentioned,
settlement here started from the early 1970s. Most of the initial
settlers were migrant labourers who rented in legal Govindpuri. At that
time, the rent was quite reasonable, INR 8–12 per month (Jiyo Devi,
Local head) with the development of Okhala Industrial Area offered
livelihood options. With the setting up of small-scale and other
industrial units here, the rents shot up dramatically from INR 8– to INR
20–25 per month as Govindpuri became the outpost for this industrial
area. Thus the migrants started arriving in Govindpuri in the late 1960s
to work in Okhala Industrial Area and the upcoming small-scale
industries, the land area wherein the slums are now situated was a
large, unoccupied, infested with overgrown thorny shrubs. In the Master
Plan for Delhi, 2001 and 2011, this tract of land is marked for
residential use. In the Master Plan
for 1962, the land area is marked but it is not clear for what purpose. In the shared, local historical recalling by
the long-term residents, this was a barren tract of land meant to be a
park. Recounting from these narratives, the shift from the lanes of
Govindpuri to the barren, shrub infested area was obvious and logical.
The rentals in Govindpuri were not proportionate to the earnings as
manual labourers, and lacking any social security systems to absorb the
simultaneous shift to the city and supporting the families in the
villages, the shift to tame the uninhabited, barren, thorny area to save
on rents and other overheads was a logical decision. The task of taming
this bareness – or as it is reckoned as encroachment in official records
and popular reckoning – was by no means an easy feat.

It was then that the people started to move in and set up their
makeshift houses in the barren tract of land. The period between the
1970s and the late 1990s was favourable to the current and prospective
slum-dwellers and the three camps saw steady inflow of migrants in the
camps: government had assured resettled land plots of 12.5 square
metres; and the *Olga Tellis case* of 1985 had categorically identified
slum-dwellers’ right to live, safeguarding them against evictions, which
‘contributed to their sense of security’. However, the ‘real reassurance
for this sense of security … came from no major evictions taking place
after 1977 until 1997–98’.

In this scenario, most of the initial settlers did not mind shifting
their base from legal Govindpuri to the slums, given the economic
hardships they could avoid along with the promise of a resettled plot in
the future. For this particular group of slum-dwellers, their shift from
lower middle-class status to that of slum-dwellers is a testament of the
lack of social, financial and allied support and security systems for
the urban poor. The majority of this section of the urban population
essentially subsidizes the everyday and sustained living of the
middle-classes in the city by providing cheap, menial labour and also
being critical in value-supply chains where they work in highly
exploitative, precarious conditions. Whilst the promise of the resettled
plots and a life of dignity in the city, and an urban futures for their
families, was a compelling factor, they have to endure loss of social,
cultural, political and emotional capital and capacities. During the
initial years of the research (2004), the shift from Govindpuri and
other parts of the country into the slums was a constant reference on
two accounts: I was pursuing the line of questioning and because of the
recent closure of the small-scale industries in Govindpuri, which had
left a significant section of the population jobless.

The first phase of the research was a humbling experience, during which
I had to *learn* how to conduct research in and about sonic cultures. In
that sense, the problem was not the inability of the residents to engage
with my research questions regarding engagement of the everyday through
its soundscapes. It was the limitations of my ability to articulate my
research agenda and aims – a methodological concern of sensual
scholarship raised by Paul Stoller in The of Ethnographic Things. By
insisting on humbleness as a much-needed perspective and personal trait,
Stoller highlights the phenomenal task that lies ahead in building a
robust epistemological, academic and intellectual tradition for sensual
scholarship. Senses, and here soundscapes, as *ethnographic objects* are
tenuous and delicate. Senses as *ethnographic agendas* are complex and
overlapping. Senses as ethnographies, not surprisingly, demand humility.
It is not merely a matter of ‘describing the way things look or smell in
the land of others’.[^fs_7] A sensual scholar needs to surrender to the
world of senses – their meanings, their connections, their articulations
and aspirations – humbly and patiently, without preconceived notions and
prejudices. A sensual scholar needs to have the sensibility to sense the
senses as they are sensed in its context. In short, making sense of
*senses* is not an undertaking without its moment of
sensorial-intellectual-methodological numbness, deafness and blindness.

The constant mention of factories and construction sites to recount the
Govindpuri slums’ sonic past, which in the initial phase had exasperated
me, in fact provided important sonic references for further listening.
It was in these factories and construction sites that the residents
found their main source of income. The persistent humming of machinery
lent a sonic temporality to the everyday. After the factories were
relocated in the early 2000s, due to the Delhi government’s drive to
curtail sources of pollution – noise amongst others – the residents
recalled the place feeling ‘eerily silent’. This silence was not
literal, as even without the machineries the soundscape of the
Govindpuri neighbourhood and the slums is very dense. This silence was
the social and cultural articulation of exasperation at a ‘loss of
livelihood’ and the anxieties that surrounded it.

The settlement patterns in the other two camps were similar, except that
Navjeevan camp was the last to be settled on account of a lack of basic
amenities – water and electricity. Unlike the other two camps, Navjeevan
camp does not share close proximity with any Lower Income Group (LIG)
-Middle Income Group (MIG) settlements, which made it almost impossible
for the residents to tap into their networks for these resources as
Nehru and Bhumhiheen camps could. Most of the residents of the
Govindpuri slums hail from small towns or villages – primarily from the
states of Uttarpradesh, West Bengal, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh
and Maharastra, where the social, cultural and moral climate is rigid,
conservative and restricted, based on strictly demarcated and defined
caste, class and gender roles with prescribed responsibilities. As
recounted by the residents during the course of my doctoral research, in
the context of their villages, it was not possible for men and women to
break social and cultural barriers and undertake jobs outside of their
prescriptive caste, class and gender roles. Slums, however, offered a
possibility to negotiate these barriers and roles. For instance, many
residents of the Govindpuri slums – mostly women but also men – work in
middle-class households as cleaners or cooks, an economic undertaking
they would not have been able to pursue in their hometown or village on
account of social-cultural pressures. Also, for many upper-caste men and
women, it allows a move beyond caste hierarchies and roles and enables
them to take jobs otherwise not allowed; these include, but are not
limited to, working in leather factories, or working as cooks and
domestic servants. This is not to suggest that Govindpuri slums have no
caste, class and gender hierarchies. The compulsion to earn a
livelihood, along with the distance, social, spatial, cultural, moral
and psychological factors carried from their native homelands, allows
the residents of the Govindpuri slums to negotiate around such issues.

In the later years, when the residents of the slums and I had negotiated
anxieties and lens of engagement with the *other,* we rarely spoke about
the past or evocation of the villages as a reference point. Instead we
remained, as we still are, indulged, intrigued and exasperated by the
fate of our beloved city, Delhi, and what how its fate and ours our
intricately linked and our ambitions, aspirations, desires, dreams and
dreads about the collective futures.

##The Markets and Materiality of the Govindpuri Slum

The three camps Nehru, Navjeevan and Bhumhiheen, are distinct from each
other – though this is not necessarily obvious to an outsider. An open
drain separates Nehru camp from Navjeevan camp, while a main road
divides Navjeevan and Bhumhiheen camps. One of the key distinctions
between the three camps are highlighted by their markets. Each camp
specialises in certain markets, which lends it a particular materiality
while revealing the community, religious and caste affiliations specific
to each camp.

All the camps lie alongside a main road connecting south Delhi to
southwest Delhi. Most of the LIG and MIG settlements are located across
this road. Most of the local markets of Govindpuri slums are
strategically situated alongside this road, as they cater both to the
local Govindpuri as well as the LIG-MIG population.

Nehru camp is closest –
spatially, socially and culturally – to legal Govindpuri and the Okhala
Industrial Area, where ‘sweatshop’-type production houses thrive. These
sweatshops provide an important occupational engagement for the
residents of this camp. The camp is divided into three communal
affiliations: lower caste communities who are professional
cleaners/sweepers; fortune tellers from Maharastra; and fruit sellers
from Uttar Pradesh, comprising both Hindus and Muslims. The fruit
sellers do not set up their stalls in the camp, but in a daily *haat –*
vegetable market – that is held across the road. There are a few tea
stalls catering to the workers in the production houses. Within and
outside the camp, the two communities of cleaners and fortune tellers
are socially and culturally ostracised on the basis of caste, and
implied cultural decadence and moral bankruptcy. Even the social workers
operating in this space do not venture into these areas until and unless
absolutely necessary, evoking ‘alcoholism, crime and dirt’ as the main
hindrances. The lack of markets in this camp is attributed to the
presence of these communities: ‘Even if we wanted to set up shops, no
one would come. It is the better for us to explore into other
territories.’ (M, 40, tea stall owner)

Navjeevan camp, on the other hand, has a thriving market specialising in
meat products and plastic goods – sheets, containers, and so on. A
significant percentage of Navjeevan camp’s population is Muslim, a group
that traditionally deals in meat products – which explains the
concentration of this business in the area. The density of the plastic
market is remarkable to an outsider, middle-class sensibilities; it is
an important element of Govindpuri’s materiality.

Two kinds of housing that are prevalent in Govindpuri : *pucca*
(concrete) and *kaccha* (makeshift). The materials used for *pucca*
houses are bricks, cement and iron. The *kaccha* houses, on the other
hand, use bricks, wood, bamboo and plastic sheets, which are used to
shield the houses from both the sun and the rain. Plastic is affordable
and durable. The plastic containers – usually having the capacity to
hold 20 litres as a minimum – are very important aspects of the
landscape of the Govindpuri slums. A shortage of running water means
residents have to constantly evolve ingenious ways to store water. The
plastic containers serve this purpose while also being used for storage
of other kinds as well. Each household has at least one, if not more, of
these plastic containers. These containers are also often used to hold
up a wall or boundary. They are also in demand to serve the needs of the
production houses in legal Govindpuri , as well as the storage needs of
LIG-MIG residents, as water is scarce in these areas as well.

The plastic market of Navjeevan camp is a very profitable business. Most
of these shops, however, are not owned by the residents of the camp,

> A few years back all the shops were demolished. Those whose shops were
> demolished were entitled to resettlement and a lot of them got plots
> either in Kondli or Narela. However, as the pressure of the
> authorities started to ease, most of the families came back and once
> more built their shops. Most of them sold their resettlement plots,
> bribed officials for fake I-cards \[ration cards\] to become eligible
> for resettlement in the next lot of demolition as well. They have
> shifted out of the slums into legalised colonies but they still want
> to retain control over this space on two accounts: first, the business
> is profitable over here; and second, they will be able to claim
> resettlement plots yet again. (Male, 32, shopkeeper, Gandhipuri camp)

Bhumhiheen camp is the most prosperous camp in the slum cluster. Its
population base is distinctly divided amongst Bengalis (immigrants from
West Bengal and Bangladesh after the Bangladesh Liberation war) and
non-Bengali settlers. The latter comprise families mainly from Uttar
Pradesh, but also from Haryana and Rajasthan. There are limited
interactions between the two communities at an everyday level.
Bhumhiheen camp has several market pockets specialising in different
commodities. On the main road, the vegetable market is held daily. This
market caters to the local as well as a significant LIG-MIG population.
As the vegetable market shares proximity with the slums, the prices of
the vegetable are considerably lower than in other middle-class areas,
attracting customers from this area. It is not easy to set up a stall in
this area. One has to bribe local police personnel, acquire consent from
local politicians and other important parties, and pay rent to the
shopkeeper in front of whose shop the stall is set up. These shops
alongside the road specialise in bamboo and woodwork. Most of these
shops are owned by people from Uttar Pradesh, a northern state in India,
where shopkeeping is a traditional professional for many communities. As
mentioned earlier, these shops cater to the architectural needs of the
local residents, as bamboo is an essential architectural feature of
houses in all camps. It also provides bulk orders to other slum areas in
the city.

Bhumhiheen camp is also distinct from the other camps in that it has a
thriving market *within* the camp. This is called the Bengali Market. It
is an organised and formal market controlled by the Bengalis, who form a
significant proportion of the population of this camp. This market is
further demarcated into specialised units offering specific commodities
catering to the needs of Bengalis within and outside the camp. There is
a specialised fish, jewellery and cloth market. One of the nearby MIG
settlements, Chittranjan Park, has a high population of Bengalis, who
patronise this market at an everyday level, contributing to the
prosperity level of the Bengali community within Bhumhiheen camp. In
1991 a major outbreak of fire gutted most of jhuggis in Bhumiheen Camp,
and which is often evoked as reference point whilst charting out the
camp’s history, as following which the camp received both state and
non-state investment to construct *pucca* houses.

Each of the camp is popularly referred to and mapped out in individual
and collective geographies and memories by its markets. In the initial
years, when the lanes of the slums still bewildered me and I had not the
confidence to lose myself to find the ways, if Pooja Masla was the
landmark for me to keep appointments with the residents of Nehru Camp;
the plastic-ware shop at the corner of Kalkaji Main Road in Navjeen and
the fish market in Bhumhiheen camp were the rendezvous points. There is
significant mobility between the three camps, but community members in
each camps have their own biases and marking of socio, cultural,
emotional and spatial othering. I have detailed these practices whilst
discussing the water routes and other negotiations in my doctoral
thesis.

Besides the peculiarity of the markets, the material fabric of the
Govindpuri slums is strikingly uniform. Most of the housing types, as
mentioned above, vary between the *pucca* and *kaccha.* The construction
of these, however, depends on the location. Most of the constructions on
the main road are up to three to four levels, used both for residential
and commercial purposes. These are usually *pucca* constructions that
use bricks, concrete, plastic, bamboo and wood for framing purposes. The
tallest of these constructions, despite having three floors, is no more
than 7 metres. As these lie on the main road, which is just over 3
metres wide, though congested with the markets around, they give a sense
of space compared to the interiors of the slums.

The inside of Govindpuri is a very different reality. Most of the
constructions inside the camps cannot be strictly categorised as *pucca
or kaccha*, reflecting an ingenious usage of materials and optimisation
of space. The streets are narrow, no more than 1 metre to 1.3 metres, in
most instances. The tallest of the constructions inside of the camps is
just over 3 metres. The houses are not only incestuously woven into each
other but are *in* each other. The lack of space and the density of
population necessitate architectural innovations, with a house’s roof
serving as makeshift rooms for others, or several households having to
share a common entrance. Drains, flowing or blocked, marked the
trajectories on the space. With the exception of Bhumhiheen camp, none
of the other camps has a dense concentration of a market, though there
are intermittent shops, dealing in a variety of merchandise, spread
across the camps.

Unlike other slum settlements in the city, the three camps of Govindpuri
have not witnessed spates of demolitions in the heart of the cluster,
though there have demolitions on the fringes undertaken by the Delhi
Development Authority to clear the passage on the main road. Considering
the markets open on to the main arterial road, Guru Ravidas Marg, the
clearance drive to move back the push-carts and temporary shops as they
extend on the road is still quite common. These clearance drives are
piecemeal and not directed at the peripheral roads in the slums. In
2008, the slums of Govindpuri witnessed one of the only coordinated
demolitions, though on the fringes, across all the camps. The
demolitions however were not towards evictions and clearance of the land
area, but in response to the Public Interest Litigation (PIL) filed by
the members of the Residential Welfare Associations (RWA) to seek ‘a
solution against encroachment of roads and services by slum residents’.
The High Court responded to this demand by the ‘construction of a
five-foot wall to divide a slum cluster from neighbouring middle-class
colonies’ as a ‘\[...\] a temporary arrangement to offer protection to
flat owners'.[^fs_8] The demolition is discussed further in the essay, *I
Wail, Therefore I Am. *

And thus whilst the narratives of being and belonging are replete with
speculations about resettlement prospects, the threat of demolitions is
not as pronounced as in other accounts. The slums of Govindpuri also
stand apart from most other slum settlements in the city in regards to
the proposed in situ resettlement project. In 2008, the Delhi government
announced the construction of 14-storey with 3,024 apartments in the
same area, about 1.5 Kilometres away from the slum settlement, Nehru
camp being the closest . It has
been 12 years since the announcement, and the promise of the
resettlement in the ‘flats’ has constantly been evoked in elections
manifestos, claimed by every contesting parties.[^fs_9] The residents of
the slums remain unconvinced of the promise being actualized,
particularly considering there are only 3,024 flats available and no
clear idea about on what basis these will be allotted. ‘Of course we
will apply for the flat, and will shift into it or claim it, if we are
the lucky ones’, Babu Lal from Navjeevan camp commented, ‘but we don’t
know whether it will ever happen’. A real estate agent from Govindpuri
contextualized the future of the resettlement project in mid-2018 by
when they were almost ready:

> The apartments do not look like in situ or resettlement project. They
> have the feel of other apartment blocks. My sense is that, even if the
> jhuggi-walahs are allotted the apartments, they will not able to
> afford it as the down payment is estimated to be around 2 lacs. What
> will happen is that they will sell their allotments to those who can
> afford it in the black, and along with the apartments, the parking
> spaces will be really coveted! Even if they can afford the apartments,
> how are they going to pay for the maintenance of the building, which
> the residents are supposed to collectively contribute towards…

Whilst discussing the prospect of allotment and living in the apartment
block, the concerns of the apartment being 14-storey and the maintenance
is constantly raised, ‘how are the elderly supposed to climb up the
14-storeys?’, ‘what if the lift if not working, and who is going to pay
for the lifts and for the power-back, if there is no electricity?’. And
then more compelling concerns about how the 14-storey apartment living
is going to correspond to the lives in the lanes, ‘\[…\] the sexual and
romantic encounters and affairs are just going to increase; here, at
least we have some control, in the apartments, they will be making out
in the lifts and on the roof’. The shift from lanes to the 14-storey
apartment block is also evoked in apocalyptic predications of the fate
that shall befall during violent altercations, ‘here, we are still in
the lanes, I am telling you, when the same fights break out there \[in
the apartments\], people will be throwing each other from that high!’.
The fact that the Govindpuri Police station is adjacent to the apartment
site is not appealing to some of the residents, ‘right now, there are
places to navigate about in the lanes, which we know well, but in the
apartments, the cops will know exactly where to find us’.

These are speculative conjunctures of the residents regarding the life
in the apartments, however it must be insisted that none of the
residents I have spoked to over the years have expressed any desire to
continue to live in the slums, perchance their name comes in the
allotment list and they have the resources to pay for the downpayment,
‘of course, we will like to shift, live in the apartments, not be
jhuggi-walahs anymore’.

Across the 14-storey, DDA resettlement site lies the Transit Camp, as is
popularly known. In official records, this settlement is called the Shri
Rajeev Gandhi Colony. In 1984-85, several slum settlements across the
city where demolished and people allotted land as a transit arrangement,
and thus the name. In its materiality, the transit lies somewhere
between the lower-income class houses of Govindpuri and the slums of
Govindpuri. Whilst most of the houses are pucca, they lack the solidity
of the houses in Govindpuri. The residents of the Transit camp[^fs_10] and
also the local politician[^fs_11] have made suggestions for DDA to convert
the land use marked in the master plan 2021, from ‘Green Area/District
Park’ to Residential Area, which will make their claims for in situ
rehabilitation stronger. Whilst there are strong links of mobilities
between transit camp and the slums, the residents of the transit camps
insist on maintaining a clear distinction lest they are also considered
to be jhuggi-walahs also owing the proximity to the slums, sharing the
similarities in nomenclature and the material conditions.

Owing to the proximity of the industrial area, the concentration of the
migrant labourers to provide subsided labour for the small-scale
industries in Govindpuri, the phases of re-settlement that the
neighbourhood went through, even though the slums appear as a patch-work
pattern, there are very strong, geographies of everyday, historical,
cultural, emotional, financial, cultural, romantic and sexual exchanges,
transactions and mobilities between these spaces. I do not intend to
romantize the landscapes of these alliances between the neighbourhoods,
of which the slums happen to be one. The relationships are fraught which
tensions and contestations which manifest in particular kinds and
practices of othering directed at the identified other, for instance,
the residents of the slums for the middle-class neighbourhood and the
newly arriving migrants and the *kothi-walahas* for the
slum-dwellers.[^fs_12] However, the dominance of the resettled, migrant
population in the neighbourhood, the materiality and the spilling out
markets of each of their neighbourhoods compels practices of ethical
co-habitation between the different groups. And herein lies the promise
of political alliances and spaces of ethical co-habitation being
actualized, perhaps the accommodation of the identified other emanates
from compulsions but the fact that these practices *in fact* exist
titillates and excites the possibilities of shared, democratic and
equitable political urban futures.

As late as early 2020, when I last visited the slums of Govindpuri to
hang around with some of the crew there – Akki, Pooja, Sonia, their
kids, partners, lovers – the living conditions of the slums have
significantly improved since the early 2004, particularly sanitation,
sewage and water facilities. In all of the three camps, both on the
fringes and in the insides of the lanes, prominent, robust and
well-built religious structures are prominent. The building practices
have become more robust with people paying attention to the foundational
structures, and the use of marble-flooring and tiling has increased. A
few of these houses I have seen transform over the years indeed look
very handsome. Baby of Navjeevan camp, who is one of the protagonist in
the essays, often teases me about the sale-deed of one of her jhuggi’s
she was tempting me with and which I was very keen on but for lacking
resources (or living off my savings in that moment), reasons I cannot
precisely recall now, I could not finalize, ‘you should have taken then,
now see how it has all developed, and maybe you would have gotten an
apartment too’.

After almost two-decades of ins and outs in the lanes, lives, dreams,
despair of the residents of the slums of Govindpuri and also spending
equal amount of time engaged in discussions about the future of the
slums, the best resettlement practices, the deliberations of in situ
rehabilitation, it is my political duty and responsibility to summarize
what the slum-dwellers really want, and here I present a consolidation
of many voices resounding over several years:

> We don’t to go from here, we have created these lanes and this
> settlement. We don’t want to have newer, safer houses to live here,
> these houses are as safe as they can be, at least three-generations of
> families have safely grown up here. Earlier, yes, there were issues
> with water, sanitation, garbage disposal...these have been sorted out,
> we really have no issues, they could be better. If something is really
> to be done for us, stop humiliating us, exploiting us, denying us
> chances because we are jhuggi-walahs. We are proud to be living in the
> jhuggis, we have after all built these houses, these roads, these
> buildings, lives here. Just don’t treat us like ‘kheede-maukede’
> (insects-spiders) \[…\] just we because we live in the jhuggis, living
> and material conditions, which are beyond your experience does not
> mean we do not feel, we do not have self-respect, we do not desire to
> be treated to with dignity...all the problems of the jhuggis they keep
> talking about will vanish – poof – if they stop treating the
> jhuggi-walahs like sub-humans.

A woman working as a domestic help in the nearby apartments whilst
talking about the way her employer treat her and others who work for
them was narrating the manner in which these working bodies are reckoned
to be beyond pain and hurting (this was specifically in regards to not
allowing her to use hot water to do the dishes during the bone-chilling
Delhi winters), ‘s*aala, unko
lagta hai unka badan mom ka, hamara momjam ka hai.* (Bastards, they
think that they have wax bodies and ours are made of cheap plastic).

Babu Lal who has been in Navjeevan camp since the early 80s, has worked
as a mason and contractor with several builders across the city, is a
repository of the history of the Govindpuri’s social, political,
infrastructural and architectural layout in the slums, and is also
keenly involved in the political landscape. Presently he lives with his
wife, son, daughter-in-law, a granddaughter and a dog in a three-story,
marble -tiled floor house with a resplendent roof in the same lane. His
astute analysis, evaluation and resolution for the slum problem, *yeh
jhuggi ki samasya,* is as following (if someone in position of power
indeed wants to listen, he added):

> This land is marked as residential land, and so in some ways we are
> ahead of the fight which the Transit camp people are fighting about.
> So, half the battle is won. The only thing that is required of those
> in power is to just take out the jhuggi-jhopdi reference in the
> official records. They will have to give us land somewhere, why not
> this area? I am telling you, once the name is changed in the official
> records, over a period of things will change. These camps will be like
> any other settlement, most of the problem is being treated demeaningly
> as jhuggi-walahs.

These the lived experiences and accrued knowledge of their lifeworlds,
aspirations and histories of the urban poor (as articulated by Babu
Lal and others), more often than not, fail to find way into policy
framing and considerations. I identify this tendency as symptomatic of
the ‘denial of the self’ to the urban poor, slum-dwellers, and those on
the city’s urban and margins. This ‘denial of the self’ of the urban
poor is strategically imbricated within the capitalist, neo-liberal,
hegemonic logics to keep this constituent population bound in
exploitative relationships to extract maximum profits from them. By
denying them real and active participation, the urban poor within this
imagination are thus relegated only as data sets and markings on the
maps which need to be cleaned, cleared and tamed towards the
beautification and smooth running of the city.

The essays in the book present the fact of the matters as listened into
and learned from the lived experiences of the residents of the
Govindpuri slums. This task of deep, engaged, and dialogic listening
into these realities, experiences and life-world of the residents of the
slums is just a modest step towards the ambitious project of ‘urgent
utopia’ and ‘right to the city’, theoretical, philosophical and
political projects which are premised on an ongoing, dialogic
interactions and encounters across all citizens of the city, including
and especially those on the margins.

##References
Nigam, A. ‘Industrial Closures in Delhi’, *Revolutionary Democracy,*
7.2 (September 2001): https://www.revolutionarydemocracy.org/rdv7n2/industclos.htm

Stoller, P. *The Taste of Ethnographic Things: The Senses in
Anthropology,* University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.

[^fs_1]: Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, DUSIB, The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) act, 1956, http://delhishelterboard.in/main/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/SLUMACT\_14FEB17.pdf

[^fs_2]: Govindpuri’s immediate neighbourhoods are Kalkaji Extension, the three camps, and Govindpuri Extension. The nearby middle-class residential areas are Chittaranjan Park, a middle-class, predominantly Bengali, residential settlement, and Alaknanda, an upper-middle class/middle-class residential area with several apartment blocks. In the vicinity of the slums, across the road from Navjeevan camp, are the apartment blocks, Konark and Kohinoor. And Bhumhiheen camp shares its boundaries with the neighbourhood of Tuglagabad (and its extension).

[^fs_3]: Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, http://delhishelterboard.in/main/?page\_id=3644., List of 675 J Bastis, last updated on (Updated 03-10-2019) http://delhishelterboard.in/main/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/JJBastisList675.pdf.

[^fs_4]: Tom Rice, 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx. The documentary was commissioned by BBC for its The Documentary program and was aired on 2 February 2015. More information here, https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/34775/Tom%20Rice%20Govindpuri%20Sound%20REF%20document.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.

[^fs_5]: For eligibility criteria, Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, Present Policies & Strategies, http://delhishelterboard.in/main/?page\_id=128.

[^fs_6]: Aditya Nigam, ‘Industrial Closures in Delhi’, https://www.revolutionarydemocracy.org/rdv7n2/industclos.htm.

[^fs_7]: Paul Stoller, *The Taste of Ethnographic Things: The Senses in Anthropology,* University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989, p. 9.

[^fs_8]: Preeti Jha, ‘Great Wall of Kalkaji’, *Indian Express,* 05 April 2008.

[^fs_9]: See: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/When-their-aspirations-of-owning-a-home-hit-a-brick-wall/article14028514.ece., and https://www.dailymail.co.uk/indiahome/indianews/article-2632029/Around-3-000-slum-families-set-new-homes-thanks-DDA-project.html.

[^fs_10]: See: https://dda.org.in/planning/suggestions/Dy.%20No.%202790%20DDA%20MPR.pdf.

[^fs_11]: See: https://dda.org.in/planning/suggestions/Dy.%20No.%202792%20DDA%20MPR.pdf.

[^fs_12]: Kohti, literally translates as bungalow, however both the houses and apartment blocks in which the residents of the slums work in different capacities are referred to as the same.



# 1. In Search of the Never-lost Slums: Ethnography of an Ethnographer 

*Hear this: clanking of utensils; water filling plastic bottles; tender
bottoms being slapped; grown-up cheeks struck; raucous laughter in the
corners; coins being sorted; technologies of communication,
communicating—phones, televisions and amplifiers, creating, collapsing
and distancing words and lives; sellers of wares, necessary, unrequired,
and varied, dangling their goods through the prowess of their throats;
children otherwise told to ‘shut up’ in the classrooms frolicking about
imitating the tongues elders speak—I will fuck your sister, you are a
cunt; the elders making claims to the fucking—of mothers, sisters,
daughters—with more intent and lost innocence; aazaan on the loudspeaker
from the mosque in the corner defining the day for many; the same
loudspeaker announcing the find of a young Hindu boy, who if not claimed
timely enough will be converted; the precious touch of the hand to the
bells in the temples nearby, ting-tong, tong-tong, tinging; the hum of
the city passing by; the vehicular conversations, honkingly undertaken;
confidences of the most delicate sorts shared across corridors, lanes,
and lives; songs of yearning penetrating through; a young girl on the
roof remembering the cities she is forbidden to visit; an old man
spinning yarn of the lives he has not lived to everyone in general and
no one in particular.*

## The Interrogation

It was a Delhi summer afternoon on its deathbed. The evening promised
the colours, but not respite from the heat. I was walking along the main
road (Baba FatehSingh Marg) which separates Nehru Camp from the legal
lanes, 15 in all, of Govindpuri. The distance to Nehru Place, the site
of my first unwitting ethnographic research, was only a matter of a
couple of kilometers but I could not wait to get there fast enough. The
long-delayed, and now much-desired, smoke and a glass of cold beer felt
like a deserving indulgence after the hours I had spent in Nehru camp.

Here, I had spent the last few hours interviewing residents of this
camp, mostly women, about their everyday. Perhaps interviewing is
misleading as it suggests an engaged, informed inquisition on my part. I
had in fact spent these hours merely hurdled in a corner, of whomsoever
was generous enough to allow me that space, listening to them live their
everyday. Even with little or nothing to contribute to these
conversations, I felt a day’s work well done.

At a few meters distance from the main road, from where I meant to hail
an auto, I was stopped by a doctor with whom I had casual acquaintance
and who ran a little clinic from a *jhuggi* in Nehru camp. He invited me
to his clinic for a conversation which I found difficult to decline.
After all, I reckoned, it was important for me to establish as many
contact points in the slums as possible. I had never been inside his
clinic. The *jhuggi* coupling as a clinic was only different from the
others I spent time in with its lack of an overwhelming bed, a
refrigerator in the corner and a precariously perched television set.
The presence of a not-so-white coat, a stethoscope and an array of
unmarked bottles with little pills extended respectability to his
self-proclaimed profession. There was nothing (by the way of framed
certificates) or no one (in the form of ailing patients) to corroborate
his claims. But he nevertheless proceeded in a precise and clinical
manner to inquire about my reasons for spending time in the slums.

‘I am doing my doctoral research, I am interested in understanding how
the poor live’, I muttered almost as an apology, slightly taken aback by
not knowing the answer myself in its entirety’.

The doctor, unfazed by discomfort, continued with his prognosis:

> You do not have to come here everyday to know about that. I can tell
> you all there is to know about the poor, these slum people, the
> jhuggi-wallahs. People like you come here every once so often, for a
> few months, and think you know it all about the poor, how they are
> suffering, how miserable they are, what small houses they have, no
> jobs, and wonder what to do about them, right? But you are mistaken,
> these people – the jhuggi-wallahs – are the scum of the earth. They
> are all pretending. Of course I am not one of them, I am only here to
> help them, but are they interested, no, they are not. They have become
> used to doing nothing, and living off charities, making a fool of
> people like you. You think you come here, they are nice to you, do not
> be fooled. Come here in the evening, the same people – these men –
> saying madam, madam, to you will not think twice about ripping your
> clothes, mounting you violently, raping you collectively, laughing at
> you all the while and leaving you to rot on the corner of the road.

When I came to the main-road again, the evening was firmly set but I was
bereft of a sense of accomplishment and assuredness of a while back. The
doctor’s violent sermonising about my fate at the hands of the
jhuggi-wallahs had left me rattled. I abandoned the collected composure,
which became of me during my visits to the camps, frantically hailed an
auto and hurried towards the intoxicants, no longer as an award but as a
refuge.

In short, I was scared were such a fate in fact to befall upon me; after
all, what did I know about ‘*these jhuggi-wallahs’*? Doesn’t everyone
speak of ‘them’ as being morally and otherwise corrupt, violent and
decadent? Why ought I be spared? I found myself overwhelmed,
emotionally, but also in the same instance intellectually and
politically compromised. After all, in the comfortable confines of one
living-room or another, and ensconced within the walls of JawaharLal
Nehru University, the bastion of left-leaning politics and teaching, had
I not proclaimed about the rights, and denial of dignity, to the poor,
marginalised and disenfranchised? Had I not patronisingly chided at
those who expressed their reservations about these others?

Now, almost 15 years later, I not only claim an intimate relationship
with the people and corners in the slums of Govindpuri, I am also
actively invested in its politics, culture and the everyday. However, I
would not only be compromising truth but also allowing myself undeserved
due if I presented this intimate proximity in and with the spaces of
Govindpuri to have come to me naturally. The first encounter with the
slums of Govindpuri, nothing less than a ‘touristic’ adventure, was a
recce of sorts, to finalise a site of study for a research project.

## A Pervert’s Guide to Slumming

In 2004, I was appointed as researcher assistant to Dr. Jo Tacchi for a
project ethnographically exploring the role of information communication
technologies in poverty alleviation in two sites in India, one rural and
an urban. The slums of Govindpuri were decided upon as the urban site.
The decision was not arrived at on account of the existing, or
potential, networks in the slums but solely on the promise of the
assured, obvious poverty levels in the slums derived from an extensive
secondary research about the state of the slums in the city. Having
arrived at the decision, I asked my then partner, B., whose office was
in the neighbouring middle-class settlement of Kalkaji, to take Dr.
Tacchi and I for a recce of the area before we set out for our fieldwork
the following day. B., a straight-sorta’-fella, was not much amused by
the prospect of I visiting the slums every day, or at least as
frequently, for the next 18 months. His knowledge of the slums at that
time was as academic as mine, but I only recall his anxiety. He complied
with our wishes, driving us around the slums of Govindpuri, all the time
recounting incidents amounting to cautionary tales about taking the
proposed undertaking. Dr. Tacchi and I were amused, but determined.

As a final, desperate, bid to make us change our minds, B. proposed that
if we indeed were so adamant on selecting a slum as our research site,
there was one right next to his office. He added, almost as an
incentive, that way, him and I could get to work together, everyday. The
offer demanded an evaluation, and we agreed to give his slums a chance,
which were basically four makeshift shanties for workers in a nearby
private construction site. The firm silence that occupied the car
informed B. of our decision. Over the years, in lighter moments, I took
to recounting this incident with all its sassy details, B.’s anxiety,
his feeble attempts to keep me away from the slums and offering one of
his own to insist on his apathy, trite middle-class-ness and for being a
straight-sorta’-fella. After all, I would always add as a dramatic
climax, B.’s slums were a few thatched huts by the side of the road,
they were a rather insipid offering compared to the squalid, spectacular
poverty on display of the slums of Govindpuri. It never failed to evoke
uncomfortable laughter.

With this personal narrative, the intent is no longer to embarrass my
then partner B., but to admit to my own anxiety in establishing terms of
engagement with slums as a concept and the reality of the slums of
Govindpuri, in particular, which has dominated my research, political
and intellectual undertakings. By adopting the tactics of deflection, I
shifted the onus of the anxiety on to B.’s, indeed a cheap attempt to
distract attention from mine. But I was the one who visited the slums of
Govindpuri, a few times a week during the period of the research
project, and the knot in my stomach, so to say, to make sense of moving
across the materialities of the slums back to my middle-class confines
left me distressed.

The encounter with the doctor, I started with, not only exaggerated the
sense of anxiousness but also compelled a methodological, intellectual
and political catharsis. If I were to be so fearful of the other, so
much so to dread my safety and violation, how could I ever argue for an
equitable, ethical cohabitational space (politically, intellectually and
culturally) with and for the others – not only slum-dwellers, but also
individuals and communities situated on the praxis on account of their
caste, communal, sexuality and gender affiliations? I was left
distraught. A paralysis of sorts overwhelmed me, I knew I had to revisit
my own prejudices, position and politics. I took a sabbatical from the
field to identify the core from where these anxieties were emanating
from and in what ways to resolve the same, agreeing that if I could not
arrive at an identification or a resolution, I will abandon the project
in the slums and instead take the research to more known, comfortable
settings.

## From the Academic to the Lived: De-coding Slumming

‘*What is it that you really want to know*?’ was a refrain which I had
to constantly negotiate during my initial research engagements within
the Govindpuri slums. I had approached the slums, hesitantly, in early
2004 as a potential research space for a project I was involved in. Till
then, my experience and exposure of the slums in Delhi was through a
primarily middle-class, educated, urbane lens which essentially meant
that whilst I was aware of the violence and rhetoric of displacement and
resettlement vis-à-vis the slums in popular mainstream media and
academic discourse, I had never experienced the space first hand. I had
no understanding of the dynamics of the space about which I had attended
more than a few illustrious talks and conferences.

Over the years, I had helps coming into my house to accomplish the
assigned tasks from different slums depending on which part of the city
I was residing in at that moment. During my conversations with the
helps, I rarely could locate the geographies of the spaces they
inhabited. Occasionally, I would try to follow the maps that were being
unfolded for my benefit. I would, however, always lose my way somewhere
in between hopelessly convincing myself that nothing was lost as ‘*there
wasn’t much difference from one such place (slum) to another’*. All
slums in Delhi, for me, were a homogenized space living the rhetoric of
displacement and resettlement. In my acquired knowledge of the same,
there was no scope for a multitude of experiences and dimensions or,
narratives beyond those of lacking and longing. My initial engagements,
then, were burdened by the guilt of middle-class upbringing which I
naively assumed offered choices denied to the others out of this realm.

The constant refrain, *what is that you really want to know,* with
shifting emphasis, depending on what I was being interrogated about by
whom - my intent, my identity, my personal situation - significantly
contributed towards my education of the spaces and lives of and within
the slums. In the initial years, my middle-class positionality framed
the engagements with the participants. More than the middle-class
identity, and what it represented, it was the agenda of my proposed
research which was constantly questioned and scrutinized. From whatever
little I knew of conducting research in marginal spaces - from personal
accounts of researchers, academic, and other texts - I was not prepared
for such an interrogation. In these texts and accounts, what was
presented was a clean, linear, one-sided engagement with the residents
of marginal spaces, wherein the researcher in question rarely, almost
never, recounts the questions that were asked of her. And thus over the
years, in negotiating the refrain, the roles of the subjects and the
ethnographer were constantly challenged and, more often than not,
reversed.

## The Politics of Poverty Performance

Years after the relationship with the residents of the slums, across
the three camps, had moved beyond the strict researcher-researched
equation, one afternoon, I was sitting in one of the lanes, a few women
and I were catching up with what was happening in our respective lives.
I had recently returned after a longish stint in Australia in mid-2014,
and there was much to update the friends with, including but not limited
to an intense breakup. The women were regaling me with their on-goings:
gossip about new and broken relationships; travels; debts; judicious
loans and the manner in which they were paid; the gold which was bought,
and that against which loans had been secured. All the while tea, snacks
and smokes were being shared with a generous amount of teasing, laughs
and occasional reprimands.

Our reverie was interrupted by a group of earnest young girls. They were
huddled together, and their hesitance was obvious. They introduced
themselves as students of the Delhi School of Social Work and informed
us that they were conducting a survey about the living conditions in the
slums. The gathered women, almost in chorus, spoke about the
difficulties of living in the slums; the lack of water; the deplorable
sanitation facilities and so on so forth. As they left, after a while we
all burst into a cackle of being on in a shared joke. Though nothing was
evidently said, it was obvious that the women (and with them, I) were
revelling in the performance just brilliantly pulled off. The
performance in question is in tune with the mandate informing the agenda
and the praxis of engagements, inadvertently, subtly and insidiously, of
most researchers, activists, non-governmental and governmental agents
visiting spaces as the slums: *the poor can only perform and live in
poverty.*

Slums as spaces, witness interventions from agencies, organizations, and
individuals assuming the role of interrogators. These interventions are
on account of varying agendas: state initiatives to conduct surveys,
activities facilitated by social groups operational in the area catering
to specific needs (health, sanitation, education, among other), and
academic-social research. My interactions with the space and its
residents fall in the last category. In the last three-decades of the
settlements’ existence, the Govindpuri *slums* have continually
experienced encounters with different and diverse researchers, agents
and agencies. The residents are acutely aware of the benefits these
encounters accrue for them, whether these be in regards to being
enrolled in governmental records, which attracts subsidies in different
forms, or being beneficiaries of different non-governmental schemes. And
at once, as is evidenced from the performance of poverty in the
aforementioned incident, the residents are astutely cognizant of the
fact that the interrogators only want to hear narratives and experiences
of lacks, poverty and *being poor*.

In 2005, during one of my trips in Navjeevan camp, I was walking around
with a group of young adults from the local school which is run by a
prominent NGO in Delhi. There was no fixed agenda for interviews or
group discussions and we were wandering around the camps, recording
conversations and discussions, and clicking pictures. In one of the
streets, the students initiated a conversation with an old woman who was
sewing clothes for an export house. The students were interested in the
patterns she was sewing and a discussion about the volume of her
assignments per week, how she finishes it, and the remuneration for it,
followed. Around this time, two old men joined the discussion. They were
not actively participating in the discussion but would occasionally make
a comment. Interpreting this as their willingness to join the
discussions, I asked one of the men, directly, a question about the
penetration of small-scale industrial units in the camps and its
benefits to the residents when he suddenly burst out into an angry
retort. He accused me of being an agent of the NGO, which supported the
school, to perpetuate its agenda:

> They \[the NGO\] are only interested in showcasing poverty so they can
> get funds from the big companies from abroad. They are not bothered
> about us. What do you know about us? They want more and more people in
> the camps to become dependent on them so that they can have us as
> figures in their files \[…\] What do you know about poverty, anyway?.

Not prepared for such a retort, I conveyed to him that I was not
affiliated with the specific NGO in question or any such organization
for that matter. On hearing this, he calmed down commenting that, ‘he
was tired of people coming and asking the same questions over and over
again \[…\] how poor are you? How do you manage, etc.?’ The two men
agreed that it was a humiliating experience for them, their space and
other residents, to be put through such an interrogation, over and over
again, just to avail a few benefits (and sometimes not even that) in
return.

Undertaking research in spaces such as the slums is a politically and
ethnographically messy affair. In the initial couple of years of my
research inroads in the slums of Govindpuri - hesitant, anxious, unsure
of the vocabularies and the grammar of the everyday in the slums - I was
doing my own kind of performance. Usually adorning only jeans and
t-shirts in my everyday and professional spaces, I promptly visited one
of those swanky stores catering to expats and bought two pairs of
*salwar-kameez* and a few scarves. This is one of the most common attire
for young women in the country, and is considered to be a modest wear
compared to the more ‘Western and attention-drawing’ jeans and skirts. A
heavy smoker I would not light up whilst in the slums, and in spite of
being a drinker of some merit, a fact which I would otherwise proudly
claim, even if not asked, I would maintain a stern silence about it. I
also at times found myself blatantly lying, particularly when questions
regarding my romantic status or the income levels were asked of me.

The encounter with the doctor, with which I opened the essay, and the
subsequent sabbatical from the field I took were pivotal in me
sophisticating my own practice and politics of undertaking ethnographic
research (not only in the slums of Govindpuri, but also in any other
site the assignment took me to) and in my endeavours of ‘working the
hyphen’.

## Negotiating the Anxiety of Researching Anxious Spaces

Before undertaking ethnographic research in Govindpuri, I had conducted
a yearlong research in Nehru Place, South Asia’s largest second hand
electronic hardware market and the hub for software piracy. Owing to the
nature of male dominated trade practices in Nehru Place, electronic
retail, repair, and piracy, the space has a very masculine character.
Whilst conducting research in Nehru Place, I had to negotiate the
masculinity of the space. The shops were I usually interviewed people
were amidst narrow lanes and the shops themselves congested places
populated predominantly by men. My presence would demand that the
shopkeepers make unhindered space for me, which more often than not was
disruptive to their activities. However, after the initial hesitation,
the interactions were devoid of the gender politics as for most part, I
was also a potential customer. In addition, the conversations, more
often than not, were around trade practices. Once the trust was
established, most men freely engaged in detailed discussions even those
of illicit nature, particularly since we were discussing the value
supply chains of pirated software, which is a criminal offence. During
this period, I had also established a relationship of mutual exchange
wherein I would bring them CD’s of the latest Open Source software
whilst they offered substantial discounts on the purchases I made. The
nature of the interviews and interactions in Nehru Place did not by any
means challenge or threaten the position of the men, socially and
culturally.

The ethnographic engagements in the Govindpuri slums, on the other hand,
plunged me into the politics of space and its everyday from the very
start. The site of my research had changed from a neutral market place
complex domestic space with multiple political, social, and cultural
complications and prejudices. Unlike the space and scope of engagement
in Nehru Place where the interactions where transactional in nature and
did not involve pursuing sensitive discussions about social, cultural,
political and emotional opinions and conflicts; in the Govindpuri slums
it was precisely in and around these issues that the research was
framed.

In retrospect, I realized that my research engagements in the two
spaces, Nehru Place and Govindpuri slums, differed because of the manner
in which I approached these spaces through the prism of what my
middle-class identity represented. The uncomfortable edginess I could
not resolve in the slums was not because the space was volatile or the
residents hostile. In my initial engagement with the Govindpuri slums, I
realized, much to my dismay, that I was relying too heavily on the
constructions of the slum-dwellers perpetuated by the narratives in
academic discourses, popular media, and everyday middle-class dialogues.
In doing so, I was unconsciously, romanticizing the slum-dwellers by
engaging with them only through the prism of lacking and poverty. In
addition, even though subtly, I was convinced that the slum-dweller
would not be able to understand my middle-class status, background,
identity and its realities.

In short, I realized, I was denying them the capacity to engage and
understand any other reality than their own. In my framing, I was
approaching them as the other.

## Encountering the Self of the Other

Gulabo is a widow who lives in Nehru camp with her 13-year-old son. I
first met her in 2003 whilst conducting research for the Department For
International Development, UK Government, on the ‘Role of ICT’s in
Poverty Alleviation’. The agenda of the project was such that I had to
inquire, at length, about the income, expenditure, and consumption
patterns of each household at length. Such inquisitions are very common
in the Govindpuri slums, undertaken at the beset of either state
agencies or other non-governmental organizations and, more often than
not, have promise of some direct benefit (loans, subsidies, etc.)
associated with them. Whilst conducting the research, my intent of
collecting data of this nature was constantly questioned. Not
surprisingly, considering the precarious relationship the slum-dwellers
have with the state, there is an apprehension vis-à-vis the state
interventions. Though I would constantly reiterate that the data I was
collecting was for purely academic purposes, there would be persistent
requests for extending some kind of help, mostly monetary, to the
families.

During the DFID research, Gulabo as a research participant offered
significant insights in the gender politics and its direct association
with income-expenditure patterns in the Govindpuri camps. She lives in a
two room, very meticulously decorated house. Her house is part of what
initially was one large slums. The initial settlers, over the years,
sold out parts of it to two other families to meet their financial
needs. When I initiated my research in Govindpuri, three families,
including Gulabo’s, formed this cluster. The entry to all the three
houses is common and owing to the lack of space the interactions between
the families at an everyday level is very intense and intimate. During
the conversations, Gulabo always evoked her widowed status and, more
often than not, analyzed situations, income-expenditure patterns, her
everyday interactions, through this prism. Her narrative was shrouded
with the difficulties she had to endure being married to an alcoholic
and the subsequent struggles when he passed away. Though her living
conditions appeared to be comfortable and she was getting her son
educated in a private English medium school, a rarity on account of the
financial burden the family has to bear, she always denied having any
regular income and evaded questions about her financial support systems.
A few months in the year, she set up a roadside kiosk to sell home
cooked eateries in the area. Besides that, she never mentioned having
any other source of income. It was a chance encounter which revealed to
me the complexity of the gender politics and the networks of financial
systems in the slums.

One afternoon at the clinic which I mentioned at the beginning of the
essay, and before the encounter with the practitioner, Gulabo came into
the clinic. She did not immediately register my presence. The medical
practitioner and she were discussing some rent arrangement and
subsequently, the medical practitioner handed some money over to her.
Interested in this transaction, I inquired about its details. Gulabo,
realizing my presence, tried to evade the topic. However, the medical
practitioner mentioned that he has to pay Gulabo a monthly rent for
using this space. Gulabo had never mentioned that she owned any other
property in the slums except the house she lived in. Sensing her
discomfort, I did not pursue the matter further. After that day, Gulabo
would be very reticent in my company. In another incident of a similar
kind, I went to Maya’s (her neighbor and initial owner of the entire
cluster) house during a hot Delhi-summer afternoon. During these times,
the heat is so oppressive that most people withdraw into their houses,
especially when the power situation permits running water coolers. By
this time, it had already been a year since I had been visiting these
families and I had established a relationship outside of the strict
researcher-researched praxis. Maya, her daughter-in-law, and I were
sharing lunch when we heard some men call out for Gulabo. The spatial
layout of the cluster is such that all conversations, if not carefully
contained, can be overheard. We could hear a transaction in negotiation.
The men wanted to purchase some liquor bottles and Gulabo was quoting a
price for the same. Overhearing this conversation in Maya and her
daughter-in-law’s presence was disconcerting. In the last year, Gulabo
or any of her neighbours had not even hinted at Gulabo being involved in
the illicit liquor trading business. Maya, who usually withheld any
comments about Gulabo said:

> \[…\] we know she does it. We don’t approve it. My late husband was
> strongly against it as such activities invite all kinds of people at
> different hours. But, well, she is all by herself. She does not have
> anyone to look after her. Her husband was an alcoholic. He always beat
> her up. Her in-laws constantly tried to appropriate whatever little
> she has.

Over the next few years, I maintained my research and personal
relationship with Maya’s, Gulabo’s, and Shishir’s (the third family in
the cluster); however we never discussed Gulabo’s networks and systems
of generating income. By then, once every so often, she would hinted
that she has sources of income which she cannot disclose and respecting
her desires, I never pursued the inquisitions. Gulabo’s is an extreme
case in point. There were many instances in the Govindpuri camps where
individuals and families did not offer information about their
income-expenditure patterns and I, sometimes, discovered some unrevealed
sources or networks, accidentally. This was on many accounts. On some
occasions, the individuals being interviewed did not have knowledge,
especially women in the households. Besides these, there is a prevalent
threat of being brought under scrutiny by state agencies if involvement
in the networks other that the legitimate ones was offered. Lastly,
these threat perceptions were heightened by my own middle-class
identity. My position was constantly under scrutiny vacillating between
being a state agent to representing a non-governmental charitable
organization with the potential of extending substantial help.

Zameela, an employee at a prominent NGO operating in the Govindpuri
camps, was an important cultural translator whilst also getting me
introductions to diverse groups of people in the camps. One of her
assignments is to facilitate community micro-finance activities. She
primarily works with women groups assisting them in setting and running
Self Help Groups (SHG’s). Whilst visiting the groups with her, I
realized that in spite of my presence, both the men and the women would
freely discussed the income-expenditure patterns divulging in detail the
nodes, networks, and systems in which they had either invested or in
which their savings circulated. After many such meetings, one day I had
the following conversation with Zameela to understand the manner in
which ‘money’ and poverty levels were articulated:

> Tripta \[T\]: When we go together, the residents do not hesitate to
> discuss, even in front of me, the details of their investment, etc.?
> Why is that?
>
> Zameela \[Z\]: What do you mean? When do they say, when you ask them
> about it?
>
> T: They do not lie. I am not saying that. I am just saying they do not
> discuss it as openly. However, when I am with you, they do not
> hesitate but also ask for your advice.
>
> Z: Have you ever been asked how much money you earn in a month?
>
> T: Yes.
>
> Z: And, do you always tell me the exact amount? Or about the savings
> you have? Or the gifts you receive from your parents, etc.?
>
> T: No \[…\] I usually avert the question.
>
> Z: It’s the same thing only a bit more difficult for people in the
> slums. After all these years, they know that the representatives who
> come (either state agents or NGO’s) want to hear that they are poor.
> If they do not find enough indications of poverty, the general
> sentiment is that the victimization will increase and, also, the
> benefits to be derived in terms of loans and subsidies cut down. When
> they discuss the finances with me openly even in front of you that is
> not because they suddenly trust you but because they trust me, I am
> one of them.

Gulabo, I realized, could not discuss the finances with me at length not
because she wanted to hide anything but because there were only that
many vocabularies available to her to discuss these matters with the
outsiders. She was expected within the constructions through which the
slum-dwellers are approached to constantly evoke the narrative of
widowhood, lack of income and fragile social support to garner support
and help from different agencies. The financial systems in the
Govindpuri camps cannot be evaluated through the strict prism of income
and expenditure; multiple nodes and networks at formal, informal,
illicit and interpersonal levels are involved. The navigation through
these networks to optimize them is very significantly dependent on the
social, political, cultural, and moral agency the individual, family, or
group can exercise within this space. Gulabo’s status as a widow, within
the Govindpuri camps, allowed her concessions to engage in illicit
liquor trade, an engagement socially denied to women. However, the same
status and her involvements made her highly vulnerable when negotiating
with the outside agencies, namely, the police.

Once I was visiting a research participant’s house not because an
interview was scheduled but because I needed to take a break from the
research. During visits as such, the conversations were not strictly
research driven and, more often than not, I would be asked to give
updates about my own life, marriage, holidays, etc. Shortly after my
arrival, a few of the research participant’s relatives from the village
paid a visit to her. The research participant introduced me as a friend
who was working in the Govindpuri camps. Tea and snacks were organized.
The conversations that followed amongst them were pertaining to a family
wanting to purchase a newborn baby from someone the research participant
knew. The rates were being negotiated. Soon, the relatives left. The
research participant had sensed my discomfort whilst the conversation
was taking place:

> Research Participant \[RP\]: Did it disturb you? Haven’t you ever
> heard of babies being sold?
>
> Tripta \[T\]: I have but I have only read about it. It has never been
> discussed in front of me. Can’t I do anything about it?
>
> RP: Like what? Stop the sale of the babies? Why?
>
> T: Well, it just does not seem the right thing to be able to sell and
> buy babies like this.
>
> RP: The women who are selling it, at least most of them, are not doing
> so by choice. There are women who have made a business practice out of
> it, mostly, women who are migrants from other states. That is also
> because they need the money to feed the rest of the family. What can
> you do? You can inform the authorities, the police, but do not think
> they already don’t know. They do. They will take some action while you
> are pursuing it and then? What will happen to the women?
>
> T: But what happens to the children? There should be some way to
> ensure that they are not sold for child labour or prostitution. Is
> that not a possibility?
>
> RP: It is, a very strong possibility. However, childless couples or
> those desiring a son also adopt many of these children. They give them
> love, affection and care their own parents would have never been able
> to afford. What about that?

I did not have enough arguments. My middle-class, educated sensibilities
were demanding me to undertake an action. However, at the same time, I
had mixed feelings. I was aware that I could not ignore the matter
whilst at the same time I knew I could not report it. I told the
research participant that I would have a conversation about these
practices with a social activist working with women in the area. Not
with the intent that those involved in this practice, especially the
women, are brought under scrutiny but so that they can be informed about
proper channels and options if they did not want to go through with the
deal. The research participant gave her consent to approach the social
activist. When I asked her whether I could use our conversation as part
of my thesis, she only relented after I assured that in the narrative, I
would not mention any names, locations within the Govindpuri camps, or
communities involved.

As an ethnographer, from a space outside of the one being researched, I
realized, that certain cultures and practices, however dehumanizing they
might appear, need to be situated within the larger matrix of the
materiality of the space. Being a widow in a slum settlement allowed
Gulabo to sustain her livelihood through illicit liquor trade. These
networks would have been very difficult for her to penetrate, if not
entirely accessible, if she were living in a legalized colony. Most of
her clients are from the neighboring lower-middle class legalized
settlement which allows her to bargain the price for the liquor. It is
the networks which the slums allow, owing to their illegal nature, to
flourish that trade practice around sale of new-born babies can be
undertaken.

## Working the Hyphen[^1_1]

Unlike many of the ethnographic studies in different anthropological
traditions which romanticize the subjects and sites, Jorge Luis Borges,
anything but an anthropologist, in The Ethnographer romanticizes, and in
the process complicates, the position of the ethnographer. The
protagonist who had ‘nothing singular about him’ sets out to learn the
‘esoteric rites of the west’ on the persuasion of his college professor
who convinces him that ‘when he came back he would have his
dissertation, and the university authority would see that it was
published’. The protagonist spends two years on the prairie, learns to
unlearn his urban-research ways and is eventually told the tribe’s
secret doctrine. However, on his return, he refuses to reveal the secret
forgoing the promising career he could chance upon by the revelation. He
explains this to his rather indignant professor by stating ‘\[…\] the
secret is not as important as the paths that led me to it. Each person
had to walk those paths himself’. He, Borges informs us to end the tale,
is now ‘married, divorced, and is now one of the librarians at
Yale’.[^1_2]

This brief text, The Ethnographer, played a pivotal role in initiating a
self-reflexive exercise in evaluating my own position as an ethnographer
in different contexts. At different times in varying context, I have
been humbled and equally perplexed by the insights, political, cultural,
and personal, which the subjects have offered without malice or agenda.
I have in the same vein as the protagonist of Borges’s text had several
moments of crisis during my research. The boundaries between what was
purely research material and secrets revealed to me for I had ‘walked
the paths’ were very fluid and blurred. I have often contemplated over
categorizing interactions as interviews, discussions, data, and
conversations of personal nature. Moreover, through these different
categories of interactions evaluate my own shifting position as an
ethnographer or an unwelcome intruder. More often than not, these
categories collapse.

After a research sabbatical and evolving my own frameworks of
participation in the research space, I made new entries into the space
acknowledging that the everyday reality of the slums would never
fundamentally constitute part of my every day and vice versa. This,
however, did not mean that either the slum-dwellers or I could not
evolve dialogic praxis within which we could attempt to understand,
respect, and appreciate the realities we represented and lived. However,
the important breakthrough in the research praxis was to acknowledge,
and critically engage with the subtleties of representations, which I as
an ethnographer or the slum-dwellers as subjects, constantly evoked and
employed to establish certain inroads (including, but not limited to,
research data) for me or derive benefits for the residents of the slums.

As a middle-class ethnographer, my position was uncertain. The
production of knowledge of and about the space, given these constraints,
could not have achieved at by establishing an economy of trust. The
trust, I speak of here is not limited to revealing their lives or the
secrets as was the concern for Borges’s protagonist but also involves
extending respect for the matter of choice for the lives the residents I
was interacting with led. It also meant allowing me to be interrogated
without any apprehensions. This trust is established over a period of
time, when both the parties involved have tested and tried the limits of
the other. Once this trust was established with individuals, families,
and communities in the Govindpuri camps, it also meant that I, as an
ethnographer, had to not question and be judgmental about certain
practices which were prevalent in the Govindpuri camps.

Here, I want to involve and engage the position, articulated and
projected, of the ethnographer as an important element of the
ethnography itself. The experience of the ethnographer cannot be
distanced from the ethnography that emerges for the ethnographer
negotiates, questions, imbibes, and treats preferentially, consciously
or unconsciously, covertly, overtly, and subtly, certain categories of
experiences than others. The ethnographer is not a neutral agency of
observation. Or articulation. And in presenting these, the aim is to
initiate a dialogue on the creation, sustenance, projection, and the
articulation of the other. The importance of contextualizing the
position of the ethnographer is accentuated in the context of the
present study as it located in the slums where the everyday is
constantly examined, articulated, and represented through different
categories of other.

Ethnography as a methodological tool is not devoid of its politics.
George E. Marcus and Michael M. J. Fischer address the problematic and
politics of ethnographic practice within the larger anthropological body
of work in *Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in
The Human Science*. Enumerating on the role of an ethnographer in
producing cultural texts, they state:

> In fact, what gives the ethnographer authority and the text a
> pervasive sense of concrete reality is the writer’s claim to represent
> a world as only one who has known it firsthand can, which thus forges
> an intimate link between ethnographic writing and fieldwork.[^1_3]

It is *this* authority, which is vested in an ethnographer, in me,
through the methodological tool one employs that one needs to constantly
not only be conscious about but also question it constructively. And I
was consciously aware of this predicament. The ethnographer, in essence,
should acknowledge the implications of the authoritative engagement and
representation with a researched space. As an ethnographer working in
the slums, I entered into the space as an outsider as I am not a
resident of the space. I have not lived the space. That, however, does
not mean that I cannot engage with the space. But the manner in which an
ethnographer, I, interact characteristically determines the
representation of the space in the larger domain. Most of the texts
about the slums, academic and otherwise, reflect an edgy nervousness
while discussing their subject matter. This uneasiness, first and
foremost, comes from the inability to articulate the anxiety of being
present in the slums. Even when the researchers are informed by the most
radical theoretical and political intent and agendas of the right to the
city for the *jhuggi-walahs,* the act of being *present* and to *engage*
uninhibitedly in their everyday is an anxious ridden prospect as it
challenges (and perhaps also threatens) to reveal their own class,
caste, communal informed practices and politics.

Whilst I was negotiating with my own anxieties, I reached out to
academic texts to find resonance with other researcher’s negotiating
with similar dilemmas. I was seeking out in these texts an assurance
that indeed *it was OK to feel unsettled in these living conditions;
that I really did not like certain people – both men and women in
the slums – for their politics, or their particular personalities and
that I was finding myself drawn to a few people, especially women, with
whom I was not only breaking the researcher-researched biases but
forming emotional relationships.* In the academic texts I had sought
refuge in, I was however left wanting for any confidantes articulating
similar anxieties.

All the dilemmas and issues which the city faces, ‘crime, dirt, filth,
immorality’ in its spread-out territoriality and temporality are
consolidated in the confines of the slums. In that sense, the slums are
magnified and amplified versions of what that city could be if it was
not as controlled and constricted. It is important to consider that the
problems concerning the slums are not a classic situation of the slums,
per se, but prevalent in the city as well.

Within the schematic of this research, which requires establishing an
engaged relationship with the slums, I attempted to deal with the
prejudices at the conceptual, practical and personal level. In this
intent, I realized that my middle-class-background constantly informed
the lens through which I made entries into the space. However, I also
realized that differences necessarily are not a negative entry point to
build relationships, research and otherwise. Until the time the
differences are respected and acknowledged, one cannot aspire for a
relationship and interactions on the same plane. In particularly
recognizing ethnography as much a political intervention as a
methodological tool, the task of constantly negotiating difference, not
towards resolutions but sustained dialogue continues to inform my
research practices and my engagements with the residents of the slums in
Govindpuri.

##References
Borges, Jorge Luis. *Collected Fictions*, trans. Andrew Hurley. New York: Viking, 1998.

Fine, Michelle. ‘Working the Hyphens’ in *Handbook of qualitative research.* Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.

Marcus, George E., and Michael MJ Fischer. *Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in the Human Sciences*. University of Chicago Press, 2014.

[^1_1]: Fine, Michelle Fine, ‘Working the hyphens’ in *Handbook of qualitative research,* Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.

[^1_2]: Jorge Luis Borges, *Collected Fictions,* trans. Andrew Hurley, New York: Viking, 1998.

[^1_3]: George E. Marcus and Michael J. Fischer, *Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in The Human Science,* Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014.



# 2. Listening: An Ethnographic Exploration

> A self is nothing other than a form or function of referral: a self is
> made of relationship to self, or of a presence to self, which is
> nothing other than the mutual referral between a perceptible
> individuation and an intelligible identity (not just the individual in
> the current sense of the word, but in him the singular occurrences of
> a state, a tension, or, precisely, a “sense”)-this referral itself
> would have to be infinite, and the point of occurence of a subject in
> the substantial sense would have never taken place except in the
> referral, thus in spacing and resonance, at the very most as the
> dimensionless point of the re-of this resonance; the repetition where
> the sound is amplified and spreads, as well as the turning back
> \[rebroussement\] where the echo is made by making itself heard. A
> subject feels: that is his characteristic and his definition. This
> means that he hears (himself), sees (himself), touches (himself),
> tastes (himself), and so on, and that he thinks himself or represents
> himself and strays from himself, and thus always feels himself feeling
> a “sels” that escapes or hides as long as it resounds elsewhere as it
> does in itself, in a world and in the other. To be listening will
> always, then, be to be straining towards or in an approach to the self
> (one should say, in a pathological manner, a fit of self: isn’t
> \[sonorous\] sense first of all, every time, a crisis of self?).[^2_1]

Listening is a political act. It can only be enacted from a position of
power, but it is precisely on this account, that this act is also laden
with the possibilities of disrupting, challenging and dismantling the
mesh of the intersectionalities of the performative, and eventually
insidiously existing, hierarchies of power relationships. In its
enacting, the task of listening compels acknowledging and accommodating
the grammar, vocabulary and the structures of the s*elves* which
constitute the identified *other.* But more fundamentally and
significantly, the ‘act’ of listening, as a constitutive practice of the
identified o*ther,* and as a philosophical punctum, political rupture,
and poetic interruption allows the identified o*ther’s* interiority to
resound in its loudness or perform itself in its firm silences. The
o*ther* is at once denied ‘silence’ as a state of being and subjected to
‘silencing’ as manner of becoming. The identified o*ther,* across the
spectrum and landscape of power negotiations and particular
constructions, is always imagined in is hollowness.

This book fundamentally makes a call for *listening* as a methodological
praxis and political intervention to engage with the self of the others
and acknowledging the others of the identified other. In the act of
*othering,* the essays in the book identify the assertion of extending
‘meaning to oneself’. Whilst the essays, interrogate, highlight and
problematizes the strategic manners in which the identified others are
othered along the axis and intersections of social, cultural, political
and emotional, among others, disenfranchisement; in denying the
identified *others* the capacities of *othering,* the hegemonic self
unleashes (or at least attempts) the ultimate erasure of the ontological
Self of the Other. Is the ‘self’, after all, ‘*nothing other than a form
or function of referral’*?

Thus: Listening as a methodology necessitates, first and foremost, the
muting of the hegemonic self. As a political intervention, it demands
the ontological praxis for the *others* to listen into their *self,* and
that this *listening* accrues the validity and veracity of and as robust
knowledge-systems within which when the *other* speaks, it is not
reckoned to be in tongues. The denial of the *listening(s)* onto/into
themselves, the hegemonic self intends to ‘neutralize listening within
himself, so that he cannot philosophize’ having thus denied the others
most fundamental claims to the structure of the self, the hegemonic self
then extends its willing ears - insists that it is *all ears* which in
fact ‘belongs to a register of philanthropic oversensitivity, where
condescension resounds alongside good intentions; thus it often has a
pious ring to it’.

In insisting on the *listening(s)* by the others of their other, the
essays in the book attempt to engage in the politics and praxis of
*othering* as practiced by the identified Others. It is in the processes
and practices of *othering* that the self of the other is to be
recognised. In the othering, as is evidenced by the manner in which the
hegemonic self encapsulates the complexity of the others into a
singularity solely premised on the former’s reflexive and referential
*listening* of the latter, the others’ landscapes of reflexive and
referential of making meaning of the self are to be unveiled.

> When two people are conversing with one another, however, a third is
> always present: Silence is listening. This is what gives breadth to a
> conversation: when the words are not moving merely within the narrow
> space occupied by the two speaker, but comes from afar, from the place
> where silence is listening. That gives the words a new fullness. But
> not only that: the words are spoken as it were from the silence, from
> that third person, and the listener receives more than the speaker
> alone is able to give. Silence is the third speaker in such a
> conversation.[^2_2]

Thus, Max Picard identifies central and critical to the task of a
conversation, a validation of the act of speaking is silence.
Furthermore, Foucault, in drawing out his self-portrait in conversation
with Stephen Riggins, insists on ‘silence \[as\] a specific form of
experiencing a relationship with others’, which he ‘believe\[s\] is
really worthwhile cultivating’ and he is in, ‘favor of developing
silence as a cultural ethos’.[^2_3] In the same interview, Foucault
whilst recognizing certain silence for fostering ‘deep friendship,
emotional admiration, even love’ also attributes it the potential to
imply ‘very sharp hostility’. For Picard whilst silence is the third
speaker, if not punctuated with ‘speech’ - an exchange, silence is
rendered meaningless retaining its ‘wild pre-human monster’ form. It is
through the act of ‘speech’ that silence ‘is transformed into something
tame and human’.

In making a call for listening as a methodological framework, political
intervention and theoretical praxis, particularly to engage with the
identified Other, it is not without deliberation that I begin with a
rumination on silences. There is an inherent anxiety in talking about
*listening* as an embodied auditory experience and methodological
intervention motivated by definite political ambitions. And here lies
the tension: unless not compelled by considerations of *paracusis* of
varying orders *listening* as a function of a 'healthy' body is an
involuntary act. Because: the ears, they don't close. And thus when I
make a call for listening with its methodological and political
deliberations, is there not implicit an assumption of deafness in these
regards, of the closing of the ears, so to say?

Oliver Sacks in *Seeing Voices* meticulously disrupted the notion of
‘world of utter, unbroken soundlessness and silence’ which both the
deaf, suffering from the pathological, and deaf, as a cultural
symptomatic, live in.[^2_4] The silence I draw attention to, whilst insisting
on listening, is the one which in both Picard’s and Foucault’s reckoning
is pregnant with possibilities at once of ethical cohabitation - an
equitable exchange - and oppressive obliteration of the self. Silence as
social, cultural, political and emotional act is denied to the others.
The self on the other hand desires and demands *silence* as a revered
state of consciousness and a right to inculcate its finer tunings; to
nurture its solidness; to have undisrupted reflexiveness; to reverate
silence as a meditative path to higher unfurling the higher selves. But
silence as a right is denied to the other: however much the self dreads
the noise of the other, its silence is even more demonic. The noise of
the other is evidencing of its industriousness geared to serve the
purpose of the self, to constantly be in service of sustaining the
silences which the self insists on. Moreover, even in its persistent
humming, even though causing discomfort, the other is accommodated; in
doing so, it is after all but a rambling, incoherent entity incapable of
ruminations and thus also lack the agency to demand a dialogue. The only
silences permissible to the other are in its real and figurative
obliteration. The denial of silence to the other is a strategic ploy
by the hegemonic ideologies, insidiously at play, changing a note here
and there, never the entire operatic scale, to evoke the incoherence of
the other as a foundational premise to not initiate a dialogue, and in
doing so, sustaining the ‘monologue of power’.[^2_5] The listening to the
others in the essays in this book is punctuated by silences,
ruminations, ramblings and ruptures towards dialogues, not always
conciliatory and comforting, but definitely to ever-so-slightly change
the notes in the ‘monologue of power’.

## Sonic Strategies of the Self: The Political Instrumentality of Listening

> A voice means this: there is a living person, throat, chest, feelings,
> who sends into the air this voice, different from all other voices. A
> voice involves the throat, saliva, infancy, the patina of experienced
> life, the mind's intentions, the pleasure of giving a personal form to
> sound waves. What attracts you is the pleasure this voice puts into
> existing: into existing as voice; but this pleasure leads you to
> imagine how this person might be different from every other person, as
> the voice is different.

This is a quote from Italo Calvino's *A King Listens,* a story in which
the position of the king, literally and figuratively, depends on
‘listening into’, and here, ‘the palace is the ear of the king’.[^2_6]
This ability to hear into the palace, which gives the king his power,
also leaves him restricted to his throne – if he moves, even briefly,
there is a danger he will miss something significant – maybe sounds of
rebellion or deceit. He listens not only because he is ‘condemned to
listen’ as ‘we have no ear lids’, but because he has to keep his ‘ears
open’ to maintain the status quo and his power.[^2_7] Owing to the
inherent disembodied and thus un-containable - *detached from the
solidity of things* – of the *voice*, the burden of listening which the
King in this tale has to endure, forgoing even his carnal and other
sundry pleasures, almost evokes sympathy. But, beyond and besides, the
burden, the *listening* is not only integral but essential for the King
– and by that extension the State, and those in dominant, hegemonic
roles – to maintain their position. And herein lies the real tension,
and thus the anxiety: in its inherent *un-containability* the *voice*
has the potential to transgress boundaries – of spaces (physical,
political and intellectual) – lending it its obscene disruptiveness so
dreaded by those in power. I will do so by making a categorical
distinction between hearing and listening to specifically identify the
sites – the ears, so to say – where the moralising politics and
containing of the sounds are enacted.

Hearing is the encounter with the ubiquity and ephemerality of
soundscapes; while listening is the experiencing of soundscapes,
informed by one’s social, cultural and moral leanings. It is a matter of
deliberation to draw this distinction between hearing and listening. I
argue that it is between this encounter and experience that the politics
of production, performance and articulation of sounds unfolds. While
everyone translates the encounters with soundscapes into organised
experiences, I further argue that not all and everyone’s experiences –
and, thus, listening(s) – accord legitimacy to the organisation of
sounds as noise, music and silence. It is in asking questions, such as
the following, that these forms of politics can be teased out: whose
experiences of soundscapes – that is, listening – are given preference
and whose listening is not?; how and where is such listening desired and
demanded?; how does the character of space, cultural contexts and
soundscapes alter and transform with impositions of certain kinds of
listening?; and what are the ways in which non-recognised listening(s)
filters in and out of these soundscapes?

Within this framing, the city–slum relationship can be presented as one
unfolding within listener – hearer praxis. And within the everyday
materiality of the Govindpuri slums, these positionalities are also
constantly negotiated. There is a highly paternalistic, moralistic,
infantilizing tendency informing the ethnographies on and of the slums,
they rarely acknowledge the contestations and negotiations of power as
manifest in the hegemonic self (city) - muted others (slums) within the
life worlds of the slums. In doing so, these undertakings continue to
the task of contributing and consolidating the notion of the other as a
rambling, incoherent entity, thus both denying them their silences as
also the claims and agency to demand a dialogue.

From within the interiority of the Govindpuri slums, listening into its
pulse, here I narrate some of the highly fluid, dynamic, political and
contested sonic strategies of obscene, perverse performance of the self
vis-a-vis the identified other.

## The ‘Noisy’ Other

The Totas form a prominent community in Nehru camp. This community hails
from Maharashtra, and has South Indian lineage. They are fortune-tellers
who use parrots as an aide; thereby the name ‘Tota’, which literally
translates as parrots. This is their livelihood. P. Nagaraja in *South
Asian Folklore*, details the manner in which fortunes are told using
parrots by this community:

> These fortune-tellers go around the streets announcing their presence,
> or wait along footpaths or in front yards of busy buildings like
> temples or offices. Usually wearing a Maharashtrian cap, the parrot
> astrologer carries a cage of parrots and a bag of cards, a book, and a
> few remedies for misfortune, such as stones or talismans \[…\] The
> fortune teller “reads” the figure and the fortune in a peculiar
> Marathi dialect mixed with syncretic forms of other South Indian
> languages in a catchy shrill voice and emphatic pronunciation. For
> “elaboration” upon the reading he “consults” the book he carries with
> him. Usually clients are offered “remedies” for evil eye or other
> misfortune, first in the form of a prescription and later from the
> various objects in the bag.[^2_8]

The interaction of this community with others is limited in Nehru camp.
They are uncouth, loud, and immoral in the articulations of the dominant
groups. Women and children are not allowed to interact with them. I was
also advised to exercise caution when interviewing them. In the dominant
narratives, the main reason for their ostracisation was their loud
habits, coarse language, and ‘emphatic pronunciation’. These, along with
their magical powers, make them highly vulnerable to scrutiny.

Members of the Tota community, aware of these prejudices, have their own
reasons for maintaining a distance:

> We are fortune-tellers. Whether you believe it or not, we have the
> ability to predict the future. In some cases, even avert misfortunes.
> The parrots are not just props. It requires years of practice to
> master the skill. We are a very close community because we have to
> pass this knowledge from generation to generation to keep the
> tradition alive. We cannot compromise with that. We cannot share our
> secrets with those who are not part of the group. Most people think we
> do nothing but sing, dance, and drink – yes, we do – but all of this
> is part of the learning process. We also sing and dance because we
> want to. There are others in these camps who are involved in far more
> deplorable activities than us – selling drugs, prostitution, alcohol –
> but they are not targeted. It’s us. We enjoy what we do and, yes, we
> do make money. If they don’t want to talk to us neither do we.

The position of the Tota community in Nehru camp, in relation to other
dominant communities, is that of the hearer. The Totas are excluded from
social and cultural interactions. By eliminating the scope of a
dialogue, the Totas are denied a voice. The sonic practices of the
Totas, however, complicate this positioning. The dominant groups in the
Nehru camp have established a very strict sensorial code of conduct to
interact with the Totas. As hearers, any sonic production and
performance of Totas is articulated as noise by other dominant groups.

Commenting on noisy Totas, a senior member of the local administrative
body for Nehru camp said:

> It is irritating. It gives us headaches. Sometimes they continue
> playing music late into the night as well. But, what can we do except
> warn them at times? We cannot call the police that Totas are
> disturbing us \[…\] they will not listen to us anyway. For them, we
> all are one. And, how can one regulate it? There is no way you can
> say, there, that is the person who is responsible for it; you cannot
> keep targeting the entire community. If we can identify one or two
> persons we might take action. But if it’s the entire community we are
> against, who we know is not going to single out people, we cannot do
> much.

The voiceless Tota community in the existing hegemonic structure assumes
a ‘loud’ character owing to the peculiarities of sound production,
performance and articulation. It is quite a common practice in the
Govindpuri slums for communities to play loud music, however, not all
music is categorised as noise, nor all its producers regarded as
uncouth.

In conversation with the members of the Tota community, I raised the
issue of the ‘loud’ music:

> We are surely not the only ones who play loud music. We are a very
> close community. Unlike other communities in the camp we do not tell
> on each other, fight with each other \[...\] we are like a big family.
> We like to do everything together and that includes singing and
> dancing. Also, some of the music we play is important for our children
> to learn the trade.

For the members of the Tota community, playing loud music is not only an
act of deliberate resistance, it is a community-building exercise. Loud
music as *noise* consolidates the position of the Tota community on two
accounts: first, the collective production and consumption of music
represent a strategy to reiterate the sense of solidarity amongst the
community; and second, it allows them to extend their territoriality
beyond the social, cultural and moral landscape where their interactions
are limited. While the loud music as *noise* gives the Tota community a
sense of solidarity, confidence and security, it challenges the
authority of the dominant group by compelling them to *hear* the
presence of the Totas, even if the dominant group wants to ignore them.

The collectivity of soundscapes from the slums, including those of the
Totas, is articulated as noise by the middle classes. The dominant
groups in both instances – communities who ostracise the Totas within
the Govindpuri slums and the middle classes who ostracise the entire
slum settlement – refuse to *listen into* their soundscapes and afford
them acceptable sonic meanings. While the sonic production and
performance of disempowered groups – in this case, *Totas* and
slum-dwellers – allow them to have a distinct sonic presence, its
articulation as noise by dominant groups only aggravates the processes
of othering through which they are further discriminated against,
segregated and excluded.

## Silencing, Silence and Unlistening

Meena is Diya’s sister-in-law. Since 2004, Diya has been living in her
paternal home, along with her son, following an altercation with her
husband’s family. This eventually led to a breakdown of communication
between the two families and any chance of reconciliation between Diya
and her husband are slim. Her parents initially supported Diya and
acknowledged the mental and physical torture she had to endure in her
marital home. However, with the passing of years, her presence is seen
as a financial burden and a matter of social shame for the family. This
leads to frequent altercations between her, her brothers and parents.
Meena is married to Diya’s eldest brother, who constantly abuses Meena,
emotionally and physically. Even though both Meena and Diya are
sympathetic and supportive of each other’s predicament, they can do
little for each other. Neither of them gets any support from the family.
Both employ different sonic strategies to negotiate their disempowered
position. They both are hearers.

Diya has, over the last few years, assumed a ‘loud’ temperament. She
openly criticises her parents, laments their failure to initiate
reconciliatory dialogue with her husband, and bemoans the limited
resources made available to her. This sonic performance usually happens
in the street. In her house, she is denied such permissions. When I
first tried establishing an acquaintance with her, I was constantly
informed that she was ‘mad’. Every time I would approach her to initiate
a conversation, her neighbours – mostly women – would join the
conversation, uninvited. They would talk over Diya’s conversation and
offer testimonies of her life, totally ignoring her presence. She is
consistently silenced. Her sonic productions and performances were
denied any validity, and thereby an acceptable articulation, because of
her projected madness. Even though she was heard, she was not listened
into. Her loud behaviour, which openly challenged the dominant familial
roles, was articulated as a sign of definite madness. She has no history
of clinical insanity.

Meena, on the other hand, assumed a different sonic strategy to
negotiate her position. In the initial years, she tried to engage her
in-laws and her neighbours to address her abuse. Her ‘loudness’, she
mentioned, would only lead to more abuse. Eventually, she stopped having
any sonic interactions with others. By maintaining a silent sonic
presence, she not only refuses to acknowledge and engage with the sonic
hierarchies established by her family, she does not allow them any scope
to either validate or negate her sonic performances. She listens to
herself, she said, and finds peace in it as she knows no one else knows
what she is listening into. Indeed, her family is much intrigued by her
silence, often articulating it as an act of defiance; however, the
instances of abuse against her have decreased as her silent demeanour is
considered ‘threatening’, according to her mother-in-law.

Slum-dwellers who have sustained engagement with the middle classes, as
domestic servants, drivers, guards and gardeners, have to follow a
highly prescriptive code of conduct in the extended sensorial realm.
Sonically, they are *silenced* and expected to perform *silence*. This
is most exaggerated in the case of drivers, who share intimate space
with their employers and often overhear their conversations,
interactions and engagements. Men from the Govindpuri slums who work as
drivers in middle-class households have a sonically dominant position in
their immediate sonic realm, yet they are disempowered in their extended
sonic realm by their inability to either engage or define sonic
practices. Moreover, in this realm they have to take orders from
middle-class women, which further challenge their position. In this
extended sonic realm, men have to sonically perform *unlistening,* which
in their immediate sonic realm women – as hearers – tend to rely on as a
sonic strategy.

The soundscape of the Govindpuri slums abounds in its multiplicity. In
their sonic interactions with men, specifically, women as hearers do not
have the legitimacy to engage or influence sonic practices. Men,
enjoying the liberties they have, use abusive language, and discuss
sensitive matters of financial, social and moral importance openly and
loudly. They rely on *unlistening* as a strategy to negotiate this
predicament.

A young woman who moved into the settlement with her husband, after her
marriage found the use of abusive language increasingly disconcerting.
In her immediate sonic realm, she was not used to men openly expressing
abuse in front of women and found it very offensive. When she confronted
her husband, he severely reprimanded her for *listening into* his
private conversation. She has been in the settlement for the last eight
years now, and she can both perform and pretend to perform *unlistening*
as the situation demands:

> There are times when you just stop listening, you zone out but at
> other times it is convenient to pretend that you are not listening,
> especially when financial matters are discussed. This way I can at
> least keep some tabs on him.

*Unlistening* as a sonic performance is employed by different
disempowered groups across the Govindpuri slums to maintain sonic
balance, which men working in middle-class households have to assume as
well. Even though disempowered groups – women in the immediate sonic
realm and men in their extended sonic realm – perform *unlistening* and
*silence* and are *silenced,* they attempt to subvert these social
hierarchies by relying on gossiping and eavesdropping as sonic
strategies.

## Gossiping

*Gossiping* is not harmless, social bantering. It is an effective sonic
strategy subvert dominant social and cultural positions. Aruna is a
25-year-old petite, confident woman. I first met her not in Navjeevan
camp, where she resides, but in the office of a nearby organisation that
provides free legal counselling to Govindpuri residents in Bhumhiheen
camp. She was seeking advice regarding her divorce and child custody.
During the period of my research, I volunteered in this organisation
once a week to help the counsellor with filing and other administrative
needs. As we discussed her case, it became evident that the separation
was acrimonious and on more than one occasion her husband had been
physically abusive. Mrs Dave, the counsellor, advised her to take
immediate action – a report was filed in the nearby police station and
the women’s cell. Over the next few weeks, her husband – who did not
live in the Govindpuri slums – was restrained from visiting Aruna and
their daughter in Navjeevan camp. The husband was incensed by this
decision. Soon afterwards, unknown to Aruna or her family, he started
making visits to the prominent tap areas along Aruna’s water route;
everyone knew him as Aruna’s husband. While spending time at the tap
areas, he started telling ‘stories’ about Aruna, including but not
limited to her involvement in prostitution rackets and the ways to
solicit her. The multiple conflating soundscapes in the tap areas were
exploded by the sonic sensation this information generated. The events
to follow took a very unfortunate turn. Aruna was persistently harassed
by rowdy men, who propositioned her when she moved around the camps,
making even the most basic of movements unsafe for her. Eventually,
Aruna’s family took serious action and her ex-husband was put behind
bars for three months. This did not mean that ‘stories’ about Aruna
stopped circulating in and around her neighbourhood; however, people
started questioning their validity since her husband, the main
perpetrator, had been jailed. For most, this was a definite sign that he
was lying. Aruna was not very optimistic about this turn of events. She
expressed her distress about having to shift from the Govindpuri slums
in the near future. When I inquired about the reason for the move,
considering that her family lived in the slums and she had a strong
support network, she said it was on account of her daughter:

> Right now, she is young, she doesn’t understand. There are people who
> will come outright and say my husband was wrong, he was spreading
> rumours, etc. but that doesn’t stop the rumours and gossip. People
> will keep talking even years later. I don’t want my daughter to grow
> up listening to stories about how I was abandoned by my husband for
> being a prostitute. I find peace in the fact that he is in the prison
> but he will be released soon; I, on the other hand, am caught for life
> in this story he has created.

After their separation, Aruna’s husband was well aware that he would not
be welcome in Aruna’s family home, nor those of neighbours or relatives.
However, he managed to tap into the volatile water route and networks,
through which he knew he could harm the reputation of Aruna and her
family, as it is one of the most important means to transmit
information, gossip and news in the locality. He was aware that here,
people – even those who did not approve of him – would listen to his
stories.

Within the soundscapes of the Govindpuri, gossip allows women as hearers
to assert their sonic selves, otherwise denied to them, as most of these
networks are controlled by older women. While the younger women in the
Govindpuri slums are under constant scrutiny and are required to
maintain a strict sensorial decorum, age allows the older women
permission to forgo these restrictions. In certain instances, they tend
to assume a very ‘masculine’ decorum. Bodily noises, which the younger
women have to find ingenious ways to mask, are nonchalantly performed in
public by older women. They abuse as obscenely and as loudly – if not
more so – than the men. During the day, in the absence of the men, these
older women, matriarchs, control the sonic networks. There is usually
one matriarch in a community who exercises absolute control. She has an
extensive network of *listeners* who inform and update her about the
sonic performances of others. These are then articulated – either
validated or denied – within the gossip networks.

In one instance, a family settled in Navjeevan camp permitted their
daughter ‘unprecedented’ freedoms, including college education and
mobile phones. These freedoms implied ‘mobilities’ denied to others. The
matriarch did not approve of the freedoms given to this girl, believing
it would only encourage other girls also to waver from the path and
assume loud, uncouth practices’. This young girl was under constant
sonic scrutiny. Not so surprisingly, the girl was apparently *heard*
having romantic conversations over the phone. A communal meeting was
called for, the girl and her parents were summoned, her phone records
were validated, and it was established that the girl was having an
‘affair’. The parents were strictly reprimanded for this digression and
threatened ostracisation if they did not impose restrictions on their
daughter. She had to give up her education and, obviously, no longer had
access to the mobile phone.

The slum-dwellers, men and women, working in middle class households
also use *gossiping* as an effective sonic strategy to subvert and
challenge their disempowered position in the extended sonic realm. Even
though these gossip tactics do not have the same impact as gossip within
the slums, on many occasions they have managed to create tensions and
rifts amongst middle class families by transferring information from one
network to another. The middle class, well aware of these gossiping
tactics, try to maintain the sonic distance by conversing in English, a
language most slum-dwellers do not understand, in the presence of their
domestic servants. These sonic strategies of the self from the
interiority of the slums exhibit a strong ‘sonically ordered sense of
self’ of the slum dwellers.[^2_9] Second, it highlights the definite sonic
strategies employed by dominant and disempowered groups (both within the
slums and slum dwellers collectively *vis-à-vis* the middle classes) to
reiterate and circumvent social, cultural and political hierarchies.

## The Sounds of Slumming (Or, Matters of Sonically Slumming)

By *reading* the city as text, where ‘ordinary men’ are scribes,
*walkers*, ‘whose bodies follow the thicks and thins of an urban ‘text’
they write without being able to read it’, Michel de Certeau privileges
sight as the sensual anchor to experience as well as produce space and
its dynamics.[^2_10] Indeed, de Certeau’s city is Western, visual and
masculine; however, in his readings he resolutely acknowledges the
agency vested in the common people – the silent majority – to displace
the rationality of urban space, ‘brutally lit by alien reason’. The
hierarchical and semantically ordered ‘surface of the city’ transforms
into ‘liberated spaces that can be occupied’ by these movements. Beyond
its cartographic moment, space transforms into an experience that is not
singularly visual in its orientation. It is populated by the calls,
murmurings, voices, tastes, smells and touches; in short, it is a
sensual experience in which each sense – hearing, smelling, touching,
seeing, tasting – defines, broadens or limits the scope of how the space
is practised, consumed, articulated, experienced and represented. Space
transforms into a ‘social experience’ through the ‘mingling of the
modalities of mingling’ of the five senses.[^2_11]

In the Indian context, specifically in the case of the Govindpuri slums,
it is difficult to articulate space as compartmentalised pockets, each
maintaining their own homogeneity. According to the 2001 census, the
population of all the three camps together was recorded as 370,665,
spread over an area of 41.85 acres. In terms of distribution of space,
this means 900 people per acre. The density of the space does not
allow for segregated spatial entities. Porosity of the city, which
Benjamin and Lacis evoked for Naples, defines the essence of everyday
reality in the Govindpuri slums.[^2_12] The walls are literally built in
each other and the roofs share an incestuous relation with the others of
their kind. The architecture has a perplexing unpredictability to it.
One never knows when one room will open into another courtyard or
kitchen. Everyday, personal lives are constantly performed in the public
eye. However, this is not to imply that there is no sense of privacy,
and no claims or authority over space. The manner in which these are
exercised has distinctly evolved within the materiality of the site. The
associations with space are not within the strict conceptual framework
of propertied claims, but are constantly negotiated within the existing
socio-cultural fabric. In the popular narratives, a displaced sense of
claims to property and its ownership emerge. The ownership is not
established in the present, temporally and geographically, but projected
in a distant future where the demolition of the existing slum settlement
will entitle slum-dwellers to land in a legal resettlement colony.

The exploration of sonic practices of space in the Govindpuri slums
furthers the embodied, temporal and interconnected understanding of how
space is created, consumed and projected. This embodied experience
provides a framework to articulate everyday life in the slums (as well
as city–slum relations) outside the hegemonic, illegal–legal binary. The
everyday reality of slums, ‘animated through sound’, reveals a complex
interplay and overlap of identity and space which significantly
determines the mobilities and positions within the
immediate–extended–imagined realm.[^2_13]

It is within these theoretical frameworks of understanding space that
the slums, in the given context, can be understood as a representative
not of the ‘marginalised’ spaces in the city, but rather the *process*
of marginalisation of spaces in the city. The lived realities and
association of the slum-dwellers cannot be understood simply within the
prism of ‘mobility’ and ‘movement’ across ‘one-directed abstraction of
time and space’. The cities inhabited, created and consumed by
slum-dwellers have to be understood as ‘a site where multiple
spatialities and temporalities collide’, and where ‘the city contains
living and moving bodies, but they are not bodies moving through
space-time, they are performing it and making it’.

The city and the slums constantly evaluate (and pre-empt) trajectories
of interaction with each other through similar cultural constructions
and categories. From the narratives in the Govindpuri slums, it emerges
that the slums’ residents view the city in the same manner as the city
represents them: as a space of moral bankruptcy. The residents who
venture into the city are advised to exercise caution. If the slums are
the other for the city, the city is also the other for the slums.
However, as the city dominates and determines the tropes through which
city–slum relations are evaluated, slums are denied a sense of self, and
the practices by which they exercise a deliberate distance – social,
cultural and spatial – from the city are denied vocabularies, and hence
an agency. Space in the Govindpuri slums is not only sonically consumed,
but sonically constructed and represented as well. The sonic interaction
amongst communities is determined by the relative positioning of the
self in the immediate–extended–imagined sensorial realms *vis-à-vis* the
other. Sonic articulations are significant in determining social,
cultural, sensual and spatial engagements with a space. The sonic
practices of space highlight these negotiations.

Drawing from these insights, instead of stating a broad hypothesis or a
set of main questions, I introduce this essay as a narrative woven
around the thematic of o*ther and othering* of the spaces of slums in
the discourse of the city and the articulation of sound/soundscapes as
an urban experience. In evoking the thematic of ‘other and othering’,
there is an inherent danger that this body of work might be approached
as consolidating the position of ‘slums’ and ‘sonic experiences’ as an
oppositional ‘other’ category vis-à-vis the mainstream, the city, and
the visual (an integral referential point to explore the urbane/city).
However, it is precisely this oppositional consolidation of these
categories, slums and sound, in the everyday experience, mainstream
media, and academic discourse that this body of work aims to rework and
challenge by exploring the process of ‘othering’ bringing to the
forefront the nuances and the lacunae of the same. The intersection of
slum and sound studies, both bodies of work which at different occasions
find position in urban history, historical accounts, social discourse,
media and cultural studies, and the field of sensory perceptions, was by
no means an easy one to navigate whilst conducting the study or framing
it within a theoretical discussion.

With all their distinctions, slums and sound studies, share the
predicament of being on the fringes, so to say, of academic-mainstream
discourse as well as experiential articulation. The situation gets
further complicated within the Indian, third world and Global South
scenario, where the narrativization of and on slums is being reworked in
languages suiting to the needs of new middle class sensibilities as well
as the burgeoning impetus to sanitize the metropolitan cities to make
them amenable for the global-western experience. In regards to sound,
the discussion is picking up momentum, albeit only within the framework
to implement more effective noise pollution regulation in tune of
sanitizing the city, particularly aimed at ‘silencing’ the identified
noisy and noises.

In that sense, bodies of work on slums and sound in the Indian context
are shrouded in an ominous silence, which pushes them further into the
domain of the ‘other’, both academically and experientially. It was this
shared predicament of these two bodies of work which allowed for this
present work to formulate a theoretical discussion around them within
the thematic of ‘other and othering’.  In the Indian context, there is
an intellectual gap in the manner in which slums are approached and
perceived. The academic tradition leans towards highlighting the lacks
at administrative, infrastructural level whilst the everyday middle
class narrative is shrouded in the language of moral, social, and
cultural decay. In the recent years, there has been some research
undertaken which attempts to move beyond these positions but these take
into account the national and state level developments, economically,
socially, politically and culturally, to enumerate the perception and
position of slums within the same. The discourses within the field of
social activism calling for better conditions and rights for slums
dwellers in the city strongly resonates with the rhetoric of
displacement and lacks, which inadvertently further calcifies the
position of the slums and its residents as the ‘other’. None of the
works, within the field of study, understand to examine the instance of
slum settlement in its own right, materiality and politics, and the
experience of the space of slum outside this dichotomous position
vis-à-vis the state or the city. It is in this regard that this body of
work intends to make a departure. At the core of my work lies an attempt
to produce an ethnography of lived, everyday, aspirational interactions,
insidious and obvious, within the *jhuggis,* and between the city and
the slums, in order to locate the slums and their materiality within a
larger discursive and experiential scope than it is usually attributed
to. Soundscapes and the politics of production, circulation, and
articulation of the same, are evoked as the reference point to
understand and explore these dynamics. J*huggis* are not anathema to the
city, whether one speaks of the city’s history or its present or future.
In fact, the dominant reckoning, interventions and reflections on the
slums contributes towards obliterating the memory of the slums in the
present but also denying them any historicity. The *jhuggis* are civic
and social spaces that are a by-product of the violent, inequitable and
exploitative processes of urbanisation. Through my essays the intent
then is to act in whatever limited way to encourage the ethics of
cohabitation across spaces, communities and ideas between spaces as the
slums and its middle-class neighbours. And lastly, to provide a response
to the everyday othering of the slum-dwellers by ‘listening to, and
recording, the details of the story the other might tell, letting that
story become part of an undeniable archive, the enduring trace of loss
that compels the ongoing obligations to mourn’.[^2_14]

## Concluding Remarks

By asking the question, ‘Can the subaltern speak?’ and answering it in
the negative, Spivak lend to the recognition of ‘voice’ as a potent
political agency for the marginalised.[^2_15] Since then the attempts to
extend this ‘voice’ has had overlapping and intersecting implications,
variously articulated both in popular and political reckoning in regards
to its significance in the rights/identity/space the subaltern can
assert and claim. In interventionist initiatives – especially, political
and developmental – this inability of the subaltern to ‘speak’ is often
translated literally. And thus the sustained efforts to extend a space
(real, virtual, mediated by technologies) to the marginalised to ‘speak’
out and thus have a voice.

However: most of these readings, and the subsequent interventions, in
fact misread Spivak's evocations, and not surprisingly leapfrog – or
completely miss out – on an a stage/situation/modality integral in
translating (validating) the act of speaking into voice as a matter of
political agency. And that is the consideration of listening. So: we
have the matter of the act of speaking translating into affective
*voice* with listening as a practice providing the necessary punctum -
the turntable, so to say, which when tuned well emanates sounds filled
with robustness and *solidity*. And whilst there is a demand, urgent and
immediate, to tune into these frequencies of theoretical considerations
for definite political actions, there is an equally compelling, perhaps
even more so in its practice, task to open our ears, systematically and
systemically, to recognise the multiplicity of the acts of speaking.

I argue that the denial of the acts of speaking to the other is
deliberated within the logics of sustaining economic, social and
political alienation such that the other always remains an
‘unactualized’ self: rambling, incoherent and in need of disciplining.
The fate of the other, who only speaks in tongues, is thus relegated to
either being silent or silenced. Critical and central to this othering
project is the denial of emotionality to the other firmly situated in
the practices of unacknowledging the acts of speaking of the other, and
rendering all the utterances of the other as cacophony. I identify the
emotional self as the availability of grammar and vocabularies to nurse,
cherish, indulge the self, to indeed have reflexive spaces and
interlocuting acts of of speaking to call out the pain, anguish, the
crushing of the soul, the injustice, violence, marginalization within
the broader matrices of class, caste, communal, spatial, gendered
negotiations. But also for the self to have the emotional capacities to
announce themselves in their full bloom. The other is strategically
denied any structures to inhabit and claim their emotionality, and in
doing so, they are then denied any structures of defiance. Sans
emotions, and emotional capacities - a self which suffers, but also
loves, cries in joy, dances in abandon, gives in to desires, makes
flippant choices, endures heartbreaks and has poetic inflections - the
other is a two-dimensional, cardboard equivalent of merely a receptacle
with no depth to evoke reaction and respond.

Deliberating on a distinction between hearing and listening in this
essay has been to highlight the manner in which encounters with spaces,
cultures and bodies translate into experiences informed by sensorial,
social, cultural and moral backgrounds. I argue that it is within, and
without, the field of force between the encounter and its translation
into an experience that politics of space, identity and gender manifest
themselves and abound in multiplicities in everyday materialities of
transforming urbanities, especially in the global South. I have also
argued that this deliberation does not limit itself to experiencing
sounds, but stretches to the body in space and the space of the body.
The body of the slum dweller in the city is considered to inhabit
illegal space thriving with informal practices. This accords her
position in the urban discourse, and her right to the city, an anxiety,
on account of either being lamented as a crisis or celebrated as ‘heroic
entrepreneurship’.[^2_16] What adds to this anxiety is the agenda of the
state to implement its projects and policies, through which these spaces
will ‘eventually be integrated into a modern and manageable economy’ ,
which, in turn, can be a blow to the informality in this economic
situation. Informality as an idea, practice and population set has been
instituted as anathematic to the projected aspiration of a ‘world-class
city’ in the global South.[^2_17] The tensions in the transforming urban
materiality of Delhi – a city with ambitions and aspirations to become a
world-class city – to accommodate these informalities is further
exaggerated by the role these spaces, specifically on account of being
informal and illegal, play in wider transformations. They extend the
cheap, readily available menial labour necessary to ensure and erect a
world-class, international city.

The sensorial and moral regimes of othering, as executed by the
deliberate un-listening and silencing, are attempts at fixing the
position of slum dwellers as the other – socially, legally, sensorially
and morally. This framing allows the state the rhetorical legitimacy to
oust them from a formal city structure when deemed appropriate, as also
to institute regimes of disciplining their bodies, individually and
collectively. Further, within this framing, the predicament of these
spaces and their residents as slums that are informal and, thus,
‘un-modern and un-manageable’, is increasingly being framed as a moral
limitation of the spaces and the residents themselves. However the
potential of the un-containability of sounds – and thus the potency of
voice as a political agency – is not completely lost to the residents of
the slums, marginalised spaces as the following essays evidence. In
these, the subaltern loves, wails, waits, argues, and shrieks; the
subaltern indeed does speak, but denied a listening – the validations of
its acts of speaking – is caught in the cul-de-sac of sublaternity in
perpetuity.

##References
Ahmed, Waquar. ‘Neoliberal Utopias and Urban Realities in Delhi’, *ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies,* 10 (2011).

Attali, Jacques. *Noise: The political economy of music,* Vol. 16. Manchester University Press, 1985.

Butler, Judith. *Notes* *Towards* *a* *Performative* *Theory* *of* *Assembly,* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.

Calvino, Italo. ‘A King Listens’, trans. William Weaver, in *Under the Jaguar Sun,* San Diego, New York, London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988, pp. 31-64.

Certeau, Michel De. *The Practice of Everyday Life,* trans. Steven Randall, California: University of California Press, 1984, pp. 93-105.

Walter Benjamin and Asja, ‘Journal de Naples’, 1925.

Classen, Constance. *Worlds of Sense: Exploring the Senses in History and Across Cultures,* New York: Routledge, 1993, pp -121.

Connor, Steven. ‘Michel Serres's Five Senses’, Birkbeck College, May 1999, http://www.stevenconnor.com/5senses.htm.

Foucault, Michel. *Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings, 1977-1984,* Routledge, 2013.

Nancy, Jean-Luc. *Listening,* trans. C. Mandell, New York: Fordham, 2007.

Peter J. Claus, Sarah Diamond, and Margaret Ann Mills, *South Asian Folklore: An Encyclopedia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,* Taylor & Francis, 2003, p. 231.

Picard, Max. *The World of Silence,* 6067, H. Regnery, 1952.

Rice, Tom. ‘Soundselves: An Acoustemology of Sound and Self in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary’, *Anthropology Today*, 19.4 (2003): 4-9.

Roy, Ananya. ‘Urban Informality: Toward an Epistemology of Planning’, *Journal of the American Planning Association*, 71 (2005): 148.

Sacks, Oliver. *Seeing Voices: A Journey into the World of the Deaf,* Pan Macmillan, 2009.

Schafer, Murray. ‘Open Ears’, in Michael Bull and Les Back eds., *The Auditory Culture Reader,* New York: Berg, 2003.

Soto, Hernando De. *The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else,* Civitas Books, 2000.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. ‘Can the Subaltern Speak?’ in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds) *Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture,* Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988, pp 271–315.

[^2_1]: Jean-Luc Nancy, *Listening*, trans. Charlotte Mandel, New York: Fordham University Press, 2007, 8-9.

[^2_2]: Max Picard, The World of Silence (Vol. 6067), *Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery, 1952, pp -9. *

[^2_3]: Michel Foucault*, Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings, 1977-1984,* Routledge, 2013.

[^2_4]: Oliver Sacks, *Seeing voices: A journey into the world of the deaf,* Pan Macmillan, 2009.

[^2_5]: Jacques Attali, *Noise: The political economy of music*. Vol. 16, Manchester University Press, 1985, pp. 9.

[^2_6]: Italo Calvino, ‘A King Listens’, trans. William Weaver, in *Under the Jaguar Sun,* San Diego, New York, London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988, pp. 31-64.

[^2_7]: Murray Schafer, ‘Open Ears’, in Michael Bull and Les Back *The Auditory Culture Reader,* New York: Berg, 2003, p. 25.

[^2_8]: Peter J. Claus, Sarah Diamond, and Margaret Ann Mills, *South Asian Folklore: An Encyclopedia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,* Taylor & Francis, 2003, p. 231.

[^2_9]: Tom Rice, ‘Soundselves: An Acoustemology of Sound and Self in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary’, *Anthropology Today*, 19.4 (2003): 4-9.

[^2_10]: Michel De Certeau, *The Practice of Everyday Life,* trans. Steven Randall, California: University of California Press, 1984, pp. 93-105.

[^2_11]: Steven Connor, ‘Michel Serres's Five Senses’, Birkbeck College, May 1999, http://www.stevenconnor.com/5senses.htm.

[^2_12]: Walter Benjamin and Asja, ‘Journal de Naples’, 1925.

[^2_13]: Constance Classen, *Worlds of Sense: Exploring the Senses in History and Across Cultures,* New York: Routledge, 1993, p. 121.

[^2_14]: Judith Butler, *Notes Towards a Performative Theory of Assembly,* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.

[^2_15]: Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, ‘Can the Subaltern Speak?’ in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds.) *Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture,* Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988, pp 271–315.

[^2_16]: Hernando De Soto, *The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else,* Civitas Books, 2000.

[^2_17]: Ananya Roy, ‘Urban Informality: Toward an Epistemology of Planning’, *Journal of the American Planning Association*, 71 (2005): 148. Waquar Ahmed, ‘ Neoliberal Utopias and Urban Realities in Delhi’, *ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies,* 10 (2011).


# 3. An ‘Obscene’ Calling Emotionality in/of Marginalized Spaces: A Listening of/into ‘Abusive’ Women in Govindpuri 

## The Calling

And thus does Zizek expound on the ‘traumatic dimension of voice’ by
focusing on *The Exorcist* in *The Perverts’ Guide to Cinema*:

>Voice is not an organic part of the human body. It is coming from some where in between your body. Whenever we talk to another person there is always this minimum of ventriloquist affect, as if some foreign power took possession. Remember (speaking over the clip from the film, *The Exorcist*, where the girl is possessed) that at the beginning of the
film this was a beautiful, young girl. How did she become a monster  that we see? By being possessed, but who possessed her? A voice.[^3_1]

This is an obscene essay. It deals with obscenity as a particular and
peculiar ‘traumatic dimension of voice’ performed by women onto other
women in the traumatized space of the Govindpuri slums. However, it is
not only its subject matter that lends this essay its character. It is
also in the liberties it takes to obscenely identify in these
performances the potential to displace patriarchal-spatial hierarchies;
an exhibitionist display of emotionality; and a well-articulated desire
for love, not only as an esoteric experience but also a condensed
social, sexual reality. Since at the core of every trauma lies (unfolds)
a violent social, moral, physical event, the ruminations in this chapter
constantly concern themselves with identifying these sites of violence
the obscene performances not only claim, but also create, on its self
and on the others.

Women spewing sexually explicit and violent abuses (in this context, in
Hindi), toward the female body, which are traditionally reckoned to be
the classic masculine expression to reiterate the hierarchy, as the
particular instance of obscene ‘traumatic dimension of voice’, is the
focus of this essay. Whilst the chapter acknowledges the broader
materiality of gendered obscene-sonic exchange in the slums, this essay
focuses on the particular and peculiar economy of this exchange when the
obscenities are not only claimed by but are also exclusively directed at
women by other women. By implicating themselves in the violence directed
toward the ‘real’ and ‘imagined’ body of the self (and thus taking
charge of that violence, at least rhetorically), the women create a
disruptive and volatile space where gendered spaces, roles, and
identities necessitate reframing. The evocation of these abuses, I
argue, is a strategic act of subversion and circumvention of the
patriarchal hierarchies. The landscape of patriarchal hierarchies is not
an exclusive domain of masculine presence(s) and reiterations; and more
often than not, it is the performance of masculinities—by both men and
women—which accord it its particular characteristic. In that sense,
while this essay acknowledges that the cartographic, emotional and
social imaginations of the patriarchal landscapes are devised by the
dominant sensibilities, women often assume a masculine persona to
institute these imaginations, especially when the exchange does not
involve gendered interactions but unfolds in an apparently gender
‘neutral’ setting exclusively between women.

It is within this framing that the evocations—obscenities by women
directed at women—are affectively employed toward several agendas:
social, cultural, spatial and political. However, in this chapter I
explore the evocation of these abuses to map the cartographic and
cathartic experience and experiencing of love in, and within, the slums
of Govindpuri (hereafter ‘GP’). The essay then dwells upon the agency
and extent of strategy available to the marginalized—here, women in an
essentially patriarchal setting, and slums within the broader
materiality of the city—to affect the designed subversion and
circumvention to complicate the reckoning of the self deflected through
the prism of sonic performances, emotions, identity and violence. In
that, this essay, even though romantically inclined, refuses to
romanticize violence by engaging with its perverse everydayness. In the
discussions that follow, it is a matter of deliberation to not highlight
the particular social and political considerations and consequences of
voice and sonic performativity as agency in the given context. The
intent is not to collapse these distinct categories. Instead it aims to
unfold these obscene evocations as a complex and nuanced negotiation
between the two to highlight the ruptures, continuations and
displacements between different kinds of sonic permissibility available
to a certain group and the resounding impact it can have.

Baby and Bitiya, two formidable women in GP, who not only allowed me to
experience their experiencing of love within this schematic, but who
also agreed to have their narratives exploited for broader
extrapolations, are the punctuations—not as objectified entities, but as
necessary instruments (in all their sensuousness)—carrying these
explorations further. I, as a bearer of the feminine form, and an
interlocutor-in-charge, insert myself in the text, not with a
self-indulgent agenda, but to highlight the anxieties of the encounter
of the obscene sorts, across myriad considerations, especially of class
distinctions.

## Obscenely, Yours

Beginning at the basics: the self, before I venture into the self of the
other. I grew up in a setting reeking of colonial and real hangovers.
Both my parents were in the Indian army; my father was part of the
elite, combative commando forces and my mother a dentist in its medical
forces. Over the weekends we had croquet games, long-drawn bridge games
and lots of gin. We, the children, did not partake in the latter though.
We grew up with smatterings of grammatically incorrect English, and our
parents—mostly, fathers—exclaiming, *bloody hell*, *God damn you*, and
*bastard*. That was the extent of obscene exclamations I grew up with. I
never heard them swear in Hindi, but as I grew older, I got to know of
abuses in Hindi: *maader-chod* (mother-fucker), *behen-chod*
(sister-fucker), *chutiya* (cunt). However, it was only when I had left
the security of parental nesting, acquired half-baked degrees, romanced
with revolutionary ideas, drank enough dark rum and reckoned myself to
be truly liberal that I started using these expletives as punctuations
as the men around us did. I was not alone. I was part of a cohort who
had grown up with socialist realities and leftist ambitions while
assuming neo-liberal sensibilities. We, of course, like them (the men)
did not mean them literally; the violence was truly displaced, or so we
thought. The beginning was hesitant though, but once realizing the
currency the utterance of these expletives carried in sustaining a moral
and social shock, it was incorporated as part of everyday emotional and
intellectual expression.

Men who found it deplorable did not see us beyond the main door. The
exchange—social, intellectual and sexual—was thus mediated by a highly
sexualized, violent vocabulary. This exchange, in all its liberal
pretensions, not only displaced the body and site of the violence, but
violence itself. However, all said and done, we never lost our
moral-virginal hymens. The liminal space we had managed to carve out
through these obscene performances allowed us to transgress across
conflicting social-moral landscapes. I had reckoned that I was thus
truly liberated from middle-class sexual mores and moral prejudices.
However, when entering yet another liminal space, I was compelled to
renegotiate the social-sexual-moral economies I was convinced I had
claimed.

In 2004, I was appointed to assist Dr. Jo Tacchi in a Department for
International Development (DFID) funded research on ‘Role of Information
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in Poverty Alleviation’. The slums
of Govindpuri were one of the identified research sites. Until then,
even though I had lived in Delhi for almost a decade, my experience of
and exposure to the slums in Delhi was through a primarily middle-class,
educated, urban lens. This implied that, while I was aware of the
rhetoric of displacement and resettlement vis-à-vis the slums in popular
mainstream media and academic discourse, I had never experienced the
space first hand. Though conscious of the discursive practices that
othered the slums and slum-dwellers, I was still reluctant and hesitant
when it came to setting my terms of engagement, primarily because of my
limited knowledge of the space. The narratives highlighting the everyday
violence, displacement and marginalization of the slums also—often,
subconsciously and insidiously (as fine subtext)—included testimonies of
the social, moral and sexual conducts in these spaces. These, the
narratives emphasized, were different, and this difference lay in the
distance from the middle-class-ness of these practices.

And thus I ventured into the slums of GP, hesitant and reclaiming the
middle-class-ness I had spent years to shed off. Or at least I reckoned.
At the most fundamental level, this was obvious in the deliberation of
attire I chose to present myself in the slums. It was not the
Westernized appearance I usually donned — T-shirt and jeans — but a more
staid one reflective of the ‘indigenous’
culture — *salwaar-kurtas*[^3_2] — with, of course, a perfectly draped
*dupatta.*[^3_3] However the deception went deeper and further: a heavy
smoker, I did not dare light up in GP; a drinker of some merit, I
refused to claim this indulgence; romantically and sexually adventurous,
I definitely did not acknowledge these encounters, or even their
possibilities. However, pertinent to the context of this essay, the most
dramatic shift was in the presentation and performance of my sonic self
in the space of the slums. The language of communication and
conversation in GP was Hindi — that in itself was a shift, as I inhabited
spaces where Indian-English was the de facto language. Moreover, the
iteration of Hindi I chose as my sonic identity within the materiality
of GP was chaste and definitely devoid of the obscenities, which
otherwise were part of my everyday vocabulary.

It has been ten years since those early days of hesitant, deceptive
encounters in GP. Following the DFID research project, I undertook to
pursue my doctoral research focusing on politics of production and
articulation of sound as an interface to interrogate the everyday
interactions between the residents of the GP and their middle-class
neighbors. The anxiety of leading an almost schizophrenic identity as a
researcher overwhelmed me, and I invested in intellectual and
methodological inquisitions to resolve the sites from where these
split-sonic performances emanated. Not without its distressing
emotional, intellectual and theoretical reckonings, I came upon the
realization that central to the assumed sonic performance in GP was the
internalization of the logic the testimonies (insidiously in academic
texts and overtly in mainstream media) sustained: the otherness of the
slums, and its residents, and this difference arising out of the
distance from middle-class sensibilities. The pathology of assuming the
deceptive, chaste sonic identity was premised not in witnessing the
transgressive spaces women claimed in the slums (as we — the middle-class
counterparts — aspired for in our contexts) by obscene utterances, but in
the danger imagined in the identification of the self with that of the
others. The self of the others was thus not only systematically absented
from the discursive space(s), but it was also strategically demonized by
affecting a distance through assumed sonic identities to assert an
embryonic distance.

Once arrived at these deliberations, I agreed to put myself into as much
scrutiny and observation as I took the liberties of the self of the
others. Thus we — the women and I in GP — smoke, drink, discuss our affairs
and political positions (with liberal smatterings of obscenities, which
we anyway employ as punctuations) with truthfulness, which does not
necessarily obliterate the class distinctions, but it surely does not
deliberately perpetuate or deflect it. However, most significantly, we
collectively acknowledge the currency of sonic-obscene performances in
claiming spaces, though not without their violence, in our specific
contexts, even though we necessarily do not perform them together.

## Shutting Anyone’s Speakers 

Bitiya is a feisty young woman. By her own admission, she has done it
all: got married at the age of 16 to her lover against her parents’
will; had a daughter by 18; left her abusive, alcoholic husband at 19;
had a raging affair with a neighbor’s relative; supported her family,
including getting her two sisters married off, by taking up sex trade;
had a live-in lover for seven years; and presently is readying to bring
up his child after they had a volatile and violent breakup. She is a
force to reckon with: ‘I have done things on my own terms and I have
borne the consequences as well. No one in the locality can say anything
to me. I can shut anyone’s speakers.’

It was not long before I witnessed her *shutting the speakers*. She was
in the middle of a heated argument with one of her neighbours — a young
woman — when I arrived. The context or the cause of the altercation was
lost to me, and I did not dare interrupt the exchange. Even though this
exchange was liberally doused with obscene expletives, they were
restricted to the normalized *behen-chod, maadar-chod* variety, but soon
the argument picked up momentum, and so did the nature of the
obscenities.[^3_4] They became increasingly violent and sexual. By now
Bitiya was dominating this sonic exchange. The choice of her expletives
insinuated violence onto the feminine body, which included, but was not
limited to, ‘shoving things in her cunt; getting the neighbour raped by
her uncles; her \[the neighbour's\] incestuous sexual encounters with
her brother, father and any stranger who would have her; and the
ultimate evocation of the sexualized violence of the neighbour's
enjoying being raped’.

The young woman was thus silenced, and she agreed to take down the
garland of worn-out shoes she had hung facing Bitiya’s house as an
insult to the latter’s family.

I was not unaffected by this highly violent and sexualized exchange of
obscenities between the two women, even though I had witnessed similar
exchanges earlier. Noticing my unease, Bitiya offered the following
explanation. ‘Here, the only way to shut people up is by spewing more
gannd \[filth\] than they can. That is the only way anyone’s speakers
can be silenced’. The explanation offered by Bitiya was not without its
Zizek-ian evocations. By identifying the sonic performativities of
another in terms of a technological-mediated object—the speakers—Bitiya
in fact arrived at a proposition similar to that of Zizek’s that the
voice in fact can be ‘coming from somewhere in between your body’. Also
in this evocation, the metaphor of speakers, which can be turned off, is
particularly telling, as it poignantly sums up the spaces of
dominance—social and cultural spaces—the obscene-sonic performances
permit. Thus in this specific performance the sonic space is dominated
by the one who can silence or shut the speakers.

However, silence—both performed (being silent) and imposed (being
silenced)—is not a static category of sonic being and cannot be
contained within the singularity of a listening position within a
specific context. Being silent and being silenced can rupture, intersect
and interlude the soundscapes in a context in similar manifestations.
But the resounding impact of the particular performances more often than
not emanates from the spatial, social and political positionality the
performer occupies. In the Indian context, the negotiations between
being silent and being silenced is strongly situated within its
historical, religious and political epistemologies. And these manifest
themselves thus: the silence demanded of the lower-caste/classes
vis-à-vis the upper-caste/classes both in their everyday, immediate
encounters but also as agents of knowledge production; the deliberate
silencing of the subaltern as a political category, and the exalted
‘silence’ of the men of cloth.

## Vocal Digressions: The Cartography of Abusing and Loving 

The narratives of Baby and Bitiya I discuss in this essay concern
themselves with some of these negotiations: sonic dominance, silencing
and displacement of spatial-patriarchal hierarchies. But they also
venture into the geographies of emotionality of the self of the other as
articulated through the experiencing love. GP is a highly gendered
space, where the mobility of women comes under close scrutiny by both
the immediate family and the extended social network. Here, it is the
feminine body on which the otherness is doubly inscribed, both of the
structural and everyday violence. This otherness is inscribed by
limiting the performances the feminine ‘self’ is capable of—bodily,
sonically, sexually and emotionally. The being and becoming of the
feminine self is situated within a hetero-normative narrative with
subservience and compliance as its core ethos; digressions from this
normative narrative are closely monitored—mostly by the older women—and
invite social and cultural disapproval; and in extreme cases
ostracization often also resulting in physical violence.

In this section I will emphasize the manner in which instances where
sonic and emotional digressions by the feminine self disrupt and
displace the registered hetero-normative narratives, though not without
its violences and violations—to the self and others.

Both Bitiya and Baby are single parents. However, that is not the only
thing the two have in common. They both left their marital homes to
escape abusive husbands and since then have been the arbiters of their
respective families. On different occasions and in varying
circumstances, both of them have earned a decent living through sex
work. Over the years both of them had several ‘love’ affairs outside of
both their Muslim and slum community. Most of them have been
clandestine, but in both their cases one love affair stands out as the
ultimate experience: relationship with Dimpy in the case of Bitiya, and
Baby’s affair with Chand. They conducted these respective relationships
openly, challenged the communal order, and had live-in relationships.
Here it might be worthwhile to highlight (especially as regards
responding to the issue of the encounter of the researcher’s self with
that of researched) that these confidences by both Bitiya and Baby were
not revealed in a research encounter but were shared over a period of
few years during which I, as a researcher, was in turns an object of
inquisition and research to which I responded with as much truthful
integrity as I expected from the researched. Over the years we
transcended the sonic distance and displaced sonic performances of
identities to arrive at sonic intersections whilst acknowledging the
class distance, allowed us—I shared this relationship with most of the
residents of GP, especially women—to share collective sonicities. The
shared collective sonicities across class and spatial considerations
within the broader materiality and imagination of the city are not
without their negotiations, and often lend themselves to varying
practices of silencing.[^3_5]

Bitiya and Baby’s romantic undertakings allow situating the intersection
of these two digressions—sonic and emotional—within the specific
materiality of GP, whilst complicating the position of slums in the
broader imagination of the city as spaces capable of emotionality.
Bitiya’s relationship with Dimpy and Baby’s with Chand came to stormy
endings. The deliberation toward the final closure of the respective
relationships involved public fights, loud obscene and abusive exchanges
and physical violence. During and after the end of the relationships,
Bitiya and Baby, casual acquaintances until then, found in each other
unusual allies. Their open defiance of social-moral-sexual norms meant
that when the said relationships ended, they could not seek out the
social support networks available to, for instance, a recently widowed
or a married woman abandoned by her husband, or one who returned to her
parental home on account of consistent abuse, predominantly physical.
Even though in the case of both Bitiya and Baby, abuse—both physical and
emotional—along with abandonment were central to their narrative and
experience of an essentially patriarchal relationship, they were not
extended the concessions on account of the arrogant identification of
‘love’ as the determining rationale for the said relationships.

Herein unfolds the intersections of the sonic, sexual and romantic
digressions. Bitiya and Baby were incensed by their partners’ new
romantic involvements, but also for not being able to receive any social
and cultural validation for their experience of love. They both agreed
upon a retaliatory strategy. The anger they felt on account of the
displacement was, however, not directed at their former partners, but
their present lovers. And thus they decided to ‘teach’ them a lesson by
publicly shaming them, by shutting their speakers. The negotiations for
arriving at this confrontation are uncannily similar in both the
instances. Both Bitiya and Baby set out to establish the everyday
routines about the other woman in question, they gathered as many
details about their histories and present preoccupations and the
geographies of ‘love’ they were claiming with their ex-lovers.

One afternoon Baby was informed that her ex-lover, Chand, and his
present romantic interest were spotted at a public park not very far
from GP. The moment seemed opportune, and the two allies—Bitiya and
Baby—set out to shut the speakers. Once the two of them were spotted in
the park, Baby took to abusing the romantic interest in question, whilst
completely ignoring the ex-lover, in highly sexualized and violent
obscenities. The obscenities in themselves demand an intellectual
inquisition to locate the violence—real and imagined—articulated by
them; however, the concern of this essay is in the very performance of
these obscenities rather than the cultural modalities of their
production. These obscenities were marked by two prominent sets of
rhetoric: first, to establish her prowess as a sexual subject by
claiming the very real and imagined violation of and violence toward the
feminine body inherent to these obscenities. These included evocations
to the effect, ‘my cunt can hold as many cocks as I want, if you had the
same capacity you would not steal my boyfriend’; ‘I can accommodate
different cocks in different orifices at the same time’; and ‘it is my
cunt, what I do with it is my business’. But the effectiveness of the
obscene performance as a retaliatory strategy lay in disenfranchising
the other—Chand’s present romantic interest—of exactly the same sexual
subjectivity and control over it as Baby claimed for herself. These
included calling her a randi (a whore), and projecting on to her
feminine body violence of a highly sexualized nature, ‘you will be gang
raped’ and ‘hope you are fucked by your whole clan, but even that won’t
satisfy you’, and ‘obviously you are insatiable, that is why after being
fucked by everyone in your neighbourhood and family, you use your cunt
to attract other men’.

The woman in question—Chand’s romantic interest—was taken aback,
especially since Baby had Bitiya to reiterate, almost perform the
function of an echo, in this obscene performance just extending the
space and scope of sonic colonization. Soon a group of onlookers
gathered about. Some men, including Chand, tried to intervene. However,
at that moment Baby started tearing off her clothes and threatening that
if anyone interfered she would file a suit of section 376 against them.
Under Indian Penal Code, 1860, Section 376 is reserved to report and
charge the accused for attempting or having committed rape. If reported,
the police have to take action against the accused, and it remains as a
recorded criminal case against the identified perpetrator until proven
innocent. If Baby’s retaliatory strategy relied upon making a distinct
demarcation between sexual subjectivities as claimed by the sonic
performances, Bitiya’s strategic intervention to encounter the other
collapsed these demarcations by sustaining a narrative in which the
other’s corporeality was held as vulnerable to the real sexual and
physical violence she had encountered in her relationship. Indeed this
was also a publicly performed obscene sonic moment. She, along with
Baby, made an unannounced visit to Dimpy’s present lover’s house. Bitiya
then proceeded to narrate in some detail the sexual violence—both real
and rhetorical—she had endured. She evoked her body as a piece of meat
that Dimpy devoured as and when he wanted; he treated her like a
*randi*, often physically and verbally abusing her. She made a plea to
the other to reject Dimpy on account of the shared violation of the
feminine body. The climactic moment of this obscene sonic performance
was inscribing the script of an imagined violence onto the other’s body:
‘he will fuck you as he wants; if you don’t agree to what he desires, he
will not shy away from raping you and talking filth about you to his
friends’. Her ultimate threat to disrupt the romantic adventures was to
file a complaint against Dimpy under Section 376, especially as by then
she was carrying his child.

## Silencing the Lover’s Speakers: Muting the Self of the Other 

If indeed ‘voice’ is to be considered as something ‘coming from
somewhere in between your body’, then it is also laden with the
potentiality of occupying other *in-between-nesses*: spatially,
socially, politically and culturally. Voice as a simple act of speech
and its rhetorical capacity to evoke a collective reaction (for
instance, political and religious congregations, among others) is at
once grounded and displaced. Voice emanates from a time-space continuum,
but it reverberates across multitudinous, intersecting temporal and
spatial realities resonating a reiteration of the voice, intended or
otherwise. This potentiality of voice to literally, metaphorically and
rhetorically extend one’s domain of being is well acknowledged in GP.
And thus the women are required to perform silence of sorts: don’t talk
too loudly; don’t talk to strangers; don’t retaliate; don’t talk back.
The women however continually perform the sonic digressions. They
challenge, subvert and circumvent these hierarchies by claiming the
sonic space, by performing obscenities of the nature discussed in the
earlier section. However, at this juncture it is pertinent to establish
that not all sexualized obscenities are registered as digressions. Some
of them like *maader-chod* (mother fucker), *behen-chod* (sister
fucker), *chutiya* (cunt) are normalized in the given context, and are
used by both men and women as interjections and punctuations, both
jocularly and in slight altercations. These obscenities are not absent
of the imagined sexualized violence. However the site of the
violence—the body of a mother or a sister—is still claimed (or in fact
un-claimed) in its abstractions, steadfastly located within the familial
and social order wherein the figures of the mother and the daughter are
revered and respected, and thus beyond the realm of the ‘real’ violence
these imaginations contain.

The sexual and social freedoms claimed and exercised by Bitiya and Baby
are in no way singular instances of challenging the hetero-normative,
masculine cartographies in GP. However what sets aside the narrative of
these two women are the significant overlaps in their
experiences—social, cultural and romantic; but also the particular
manner in which both of them assumed a certain masculinity in claiming
these spaces. The instance of Bitiya ‘shutting anyone’s speaker’ is but
an assertion of it. They are both constantly approached by neighbours,
relatives and friends to deal and negotiate situations, especially
involving local cops, goons and matters of fights in their respective
streets; one of the reasons why both women enjoy this privileged
position is on account of their ability to spew filth and shut anyone’s
speakers. As mentioned earlier, GP is a highly gendered space where the
mobilities and performances of women—social, sexual and sonic—are highly
restricted. The ‘obscene’ sonic performances of Bitiya and Baby disrupt
the established hierarchies. The men—often amused—find it disconcerting
because of its emasculating potential to displace them from their
claimed space. The women—especially those at whom these obscenities are
directed—are further disenfranchised by the peculiar encounter of
gendered violence (however rhetorical and free of real violence) by
other women. However, Bitiya and Baby, though performing this violence
and claiming the masculine space, are not subtracted from the rhetorical
and violence onto the feminine self inflicted by these
sonic-obscenities. The only recourse available to them to claim the
masculine spaces, as women who are *besharam* \[shameless\] enough to
spew the obscenities, is to expose their own cartographic, emotional,
sexual and sonic selves to the very violence they intend to inflict, and
thus displace.

If women spewing sexualized, violent abuses are the ultimate sonic
digression, the declaration of love—as an experience and desire—by them
is its emotional equivalent. Love and its declaration threaten to
disrupt the precariously sustained order of normative social, moral and
sexual values, especially in regard to containing and controlling the
feminine self. The obscenities performed by women, which do indeed
register as sonic digressions and affectively disrupt the
spatial-patriarchal-sonic hierarchies, are the ones in which the women
directly implicate themselves and other women in the violence directed
toward the real and imagined feminine self.

## The Danger of the Other’s Love 

Love is dangerous. It resounds with social, sexual and moral
possibilities and digressions. However, the pathological dread of
declaration of love— especially by women—is the exhibitionist display of
the self vis-à-vis an identified other. In the concluding discussion to
this essay, I will situate this pathological dread of love as a peculiar
instance of perverse masculinities in a marginalized setting of the
slums. I shall also highlight the manner in which this perversity, and
thus its depravity, of slums often evoked by the state, middle-class
retort, and in cultural representation of slums is a justification to
maintain a distance from these spaces and displace them. A paternalistic
disciplining agenda is inherent to these narratives, which is
symptomatic of the broader anxiety of the dominant structures and
narratives to allow for an emotionality, and thus an identification of a
well-defined and claimed a sense of self to the marginalized spaces and
communities.

As discussed in the previous section, Bitiya and Baby found solace in
each other to articulate their experience, anxiety and trauma of love
within these negotiated cartographies. It was only within the shared
experience of displaced selves that the two of them could rehabilitate
their individual self, especially since they lacked any other narrative
spaces to claim it. The end of their respective relationships was
articulated by both of them (in collective and independent conversations
where I was inadvertently present)—in different terms—as a significant
moment of rupture to the projected and imagined sense of self, as within
weeks of the break-up both Dimpy and Chand had assumed new romantic
relationships. Socially, culturally, sonically and sexually lacking the
space to locate the love as a valid category of experience within the
real materiality of GP, the displacement from an imagined site—however
displaced—where this experience was validated by the presence of a
responsive other; both Bitiya and Baby encountered the ultimate
displacement of being absented from this collective, fantastical realm
by the insertion of an another—sexually active and sonically
performative self. The voice of the other (Dimpy’s and Chand’s newly
acquired romantic interests), muting their own, compelled them into
undertaking matters, into shutting the other’s speakers—even whilst
sharing an intimate, immediate and violent identification with the other
as always occupying the space of the Other within the hegemonic,
masculine performativities and spaces.

## Emotionality in Marginalized Spaces: The Self of the Other 

Slums are heterotopic spaces in the city. They are both dreaded and
desired, the former for its potential to disrupt the fundamental core of
social-moral values owing to the imaginations it evokes on account of
its density, dirt and digressions—social, cultural and moral. Within
this dreaded potentiality for digressions lies its perverse desire.
However, this desire rarely translates into a direct engagement with the
space, but manifests itself in the hyperbolic interest in situating the
position of the slums in the present of the city. This tension was
especially exaggerated in a city like Delhi, with its ambitions to
transform itself into a ‘*world-class, clean, green’ city.* Moreover
this transformation, essentially structural, also relies on the readily
available, cheap manual labour from these marginalized spaces and
communities. This ambition draws inspiration from following the
Singaporean model, which prides itself in transforming itself into a
‘world-class city’ under Lee Kuwan Yew in a very short period of time.
In fact, Sheila Dixit, Delhi’s chief minister in her third term, got a
special mention in LKY Cities in Transformation Award4 for her efforts
to improve the city’s environmental, civic and urban planning.[^3_6]

With ‘Delhi as Singapore’, Sheila Dixit extended to the burgeoning
middle-class in Delhi a model that immensely appealed to their
aspirational ambitions of what Slavoj Zizek identifies as ‘capitalism
with *Asian values’.*[^3_7] The scope of this text does not allow to
engage at length with the problematic and politics of employing ‘Delhi
as Singapore’ model as strategic rhetorical tool, which was affectively
employed to justify violence—by the way of demolitions, displacement and
resettlement—on marginalized spaces and communities (namely,
slum-dwellers, homeless people and migrant labour) in the city. However,
it allows to explore the particular reckoning of the self as a modern,
disciplined and self-governing individuated entity which has insidiously
found its way into urban planning discourse as well mainstream, cultural
representations. It is within this particular notionality of the self
that I complicate the position of slums in the broader imagination of
urban materiality by focusing on its emotionality with love as a key
concern in GP.

The Oxford English Dictionary defines emotions (n.) as ‘a strong feeling
deriving from one’s circumstances, mood, or relationships with others’,
and ‘emotional’ and ‘emotionality’ are defined as the states that
express this ‘strong feeling’. Central to this definition of emotions
extending to its performance, emotionality, is a strong sense of self
and the relationship of this self with an identified other. Slums are
strategically denied a self as it allows to accommodate the anxiety
about their otherness across political, intellectual, social, cultural
and indeed, emotional manifestations. In its most fundamental aspect, it
completely disenfranchises slums of any identity and thus its assertion.
It systematically limits their right to the city. This fundamental
disenfranchisement further extends into denying the slums and its
residents the possibility to imagine an (or any) other. The denial of
the self of the slums in discursive spaces, middle-class imagination and
mainstream representation is then logically extended to acknowledging
any emotional capacity or its performance, emotionality.

This double denial, first of the self of the slums and then the
possibility of othering by the other, translates not only in immediate
disenfranchisement, but also significantly allows for the displacement
of the marginalized both in the historical and futuristic imagination of
the urban. The peculiarity of the suspended displacement in the
imagination of the state is not incidental but strategic. Owing to this
suspension, the demolition, displacement or violence inflicted on the
slums finds justification as it is understood that they neither have any
historicity nor any future claims to the memory and culture of the space
they inhabit—that until re-settled by the state, they exist in a void.
And thus the ruthlessness of the violence inflicted is often masked
within the rhetoric of benevolence; in that they are in fact being
extended legitimate claims to history, memory and culture. The lack of
acknowledgement to their emotionality is yet another strategy (though
seemingly insidious and instinctive) to perpetuate their violence. For,
if the residents of the slums were indeed identified as ‘emotionally’
capable, they would have to be acknowledged to have capabilities of
individual expression, which would then extend to acknowledging their
collective identities as well.

However, this denial of emotionality does not imply that their
performance or expression of self in the public, or for that matter in
their private spaces is not unacknowledged. In fact the performance is
constantly scrutinized; however it is not engaged within the framework
of expression of self but as a gross deviance from the modern,
disciplined and self-governed self that is acquiring a currency within
the cultures of urban transformation in Delhi. And this imagination of
the self, drawing from the Singaporean model, has been affectively
consolidated in the popular, middle-class aspirations, which then find
resonance in urban planning projects, several of which — including the
Bhagidhari system — were recognized as exemplary efforts by Sheila
Dixit in the special mention she received in LKY’s Cities in
Transformation Awards.[^3_8]

## Love in the Times of Othering: Muting the Self of the Other 

At the outset this chapter announced its obscene intent. And here, in
the conclusion, wherein the narrative structure demands a closure and
neatly folded resolutions, the essay performs its hyperbolic obscenity
by its refusal to succumb to these compulsions in that it does not
arrive at a logical culmination of the conversations initiated, but aims
to leave with provocations both for the author and its reader. The
deliberation to listen into the obscene sonic performances of women in
GP, the identification of self, emotionality and moments of disruption
of sonic-spatial and patriarchal negotiations was not a cheap attempt
toward sensationalization. Instead by undertaking these listenings—not
without their violence, both real and imagined—it was to precisely
highlight the perversity of the available moments of encounters between
the mainstream and the marginalized to recognize these pathologies: of
the self of the other.

Women spewing the highly sexualized and violent abuses in GP are a
perverse titillation to the dominant agents (here, men) and narratives
in its real encounter with this body but also in situating these bodies
as sexual subjects within the broader cartographic imagination of self
and emotions. If the women are indeed articulate and claim these
violence(s), it is because they desire them. But also the vocalization
of this desire—a performance of the self, so to say—necessitates the
imperative to discipline them. And thus the space and scope available to
women to express themselves is limited to obscene performances and
encounters, which are fundamentally recognized as offensive or
disgusting by accepted standards of morality and decency. Even love, an
otherwise exalted and celebrated emotion of being within the mainstream
hegemonic discourse, is only allowed to be actualized and articulated
within the discussed obscene performances of and by the women in GP.
Thus love as an expression of self and emotionality is denied legitimacy
to the women in GP, operable only in its hyperbolic manifestations. This
particular predicament of women in GP is not only representative of the
sustained marginalization they encounter as the other within its
dominant, patriarchal context but also symptomatic of the othering slums
(as a space) encounter within the broader urban imagination. Essential
to sustain the othering—inscribed on the women in the localized context
of GP, and slums as a space in its generalized projection—is then to
deny them a well-articulated sense of self by dismissing their
emotionality.

However, emotions indeed do abound in marginalized spaces. But making
this seemingly commonsensical assertion demands qualification, and more
importantly, quantification. Within the very tapestry of this necessity
to qualify are woven the questions which have preoccupied philosophers,
scholars across disciplines and artists: the construction of the self,
the position of the individual and the intimate relationship between the
self and the state, which then raises further issues of citizenship and
the spaces available to different and diverse selves to enact it in its
complete capacity. However significant these questions are, here it is
important to attempt to unveil not only whether emotions abound in
marginalized spaces (in fact I begin with that assertion), but to
further understand the politics of denial of emotionality in these
spaces. The recognition of the emotional of the other is also plagued
with a fundamental methodological and philosophical paradox. Indeed,
here lies an inherent dilemma because in recognizing the emotional of
the other, one also acknowledges the ‘self’ of the other (and in fact
engages with it).

## And Thus, the Savage Is a Savage, and Remains a Savage

Perhaps we need to take a step back, and before pondering on the denial
of emotionality and its politics, perhaps it is pertinent to wonder why
the denial in the first place. Of course, there is the entire
contestation of the self-other as discussed in the earlier section, and
indeed inherent to this denial is a strategic disciplining agenda.
However, we, as human beings, are instinctively and intuitively aware of
emotions; we know they are important and that they shape our lives in
ways sometimes even beyond our imagination. We all have succumbed to
them: love, jealousy, loneliness, betrayal, anger, angst, hurt. This
landscape abounds in its wilderness. And only while taking a walk amid
this wilderness of emotional possibilities, especially while reflecting
on the self-other constitutions in this landscape, does it becomes
evident that the other after all is not denied all emotionality. The
emotions associated with the other, which find credence, and even
sympathy, are of anger, rage and betrayal (though only if it is against
the system). There is sometimes even space for the performance of these
emotions by the others; though it is only recognized in its collective
manifestations justified, celebrated, sympathized or dreaded within the
rhetoric of the subaltern, finally rising in the long-awaited
revolution.

In *Don’t Ask Me for That Love Again*, one of the greatest poets from
South Asia and a committed communist, Faiz Ahmed Faiz, while celebrating
his lover’s beauty, evokes most poignant imagery to justify his
forsaking the love for a cause thus: ‘There are other sorrows in this
world/comforts other than love/ Don’t ask me, my love, for that love
again’.[^3_9] Here, the sorrows are not of a personal nature, but a
response to the plight of the poor in society whose ‘\[…\] bodies
\[are\] plastered with ash, bathed in blood’ to serve the rich who have
‘cast their spell on history’. Romantic love is not for the
revolutionary, perhaps an impediment to the Revolution itself? But why
is love an anathema to revolution? And if the revolutionary herself
cannot claim love, what about those—the others—for whom the
revolutionary renounces her love? The cathartic moment in the compulsion
to choose or renounce love in one’s commitment to the self or the other
lies in the very individuated and involved articulation of love as an
experience, process and practice.

Love as a concern for philosophers, scholars, mainstream media and
popular culture remains the epitome of the celebration of the self: in
the surrendering, suffering, exhilaration and complete indulgence it
demands. It is indeed almost a narcissistic indulgence. It has capacity
to completely obliterate the other. When the poet, in the throes of his
melancholia, announces to his lover that romantic love is not an
indulgence he can afford, the loved — the other — is completely absented.
The pathos and the pain of the loved are irrelevant, and it is the
lover’s discourse that dominates. It is this dread of the other as an
individuated entity with the capacity to not only experience but also
articulate a plethora of intense emotions with the potential to absent
and obliterate the other of the other that propels the hegemonic
imagination into catatonic paralysis to acknowledge love as a valid
category of emotionality of the marginalized. And thus only spaces
available to the self of the other to claim sonic and emotional
territories is through either an obscene or a hysterical performance.
This hyperbolic rhetoric is then strategically evoked to deny an
acknowledgement of their self within broader, structural discursive
spaces.

##References
Chandola, Tripta. ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in
Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review* 34.4 (2012): 391–408.

Faiz, Ahmed Faiz. ‘Don't Ask Me for That Love Again’, trans. Agha Shahid
Ali, in *The Rebel’s Silhouette: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz,* Amherst: Massachusetts UP, 1995,* p. 5.

Pandey, Ponam Chandra. ‘Sheila Dixit: Architect of Modern Delhi, Wanted
to Develop it like Singapore’,
https://morningindia.in/sheila-dikshit-architect-of-modern-delhi-wanted-to-develop-it-like-singapore/’.

Zizek, Slavoj. 'Capitalism with Asian Values', *Al Jazeera*, 13 November
2011,
https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2011/10/2011102813360731764.html.

Zizek, Slavoj. *The Pervert’s Guide to Cinema* (dir. Sophie Fiennes,
2006).

[^3_1]: *Slavoj Zizek’s The Pervert’s Guide to Cinema* (dir. Sophie Fiennes, 2006). Emphasis added.

[^3_2]: A type of suit with loose trousers and long shirt. It is a common, everyday attire for most young women in Asia.

[^3_3]: A long scarf worn with the salwaar-kurtas; in most instances it is considered essential, and not wearing it is often seen as a sign of indecency.

[^3_4]: Literally translated as sister-fucker and mother-fucker, respectively, these abuses are used in the everyday, common exchange without the direct implications and violence suggested.

[^3_5]: Tripta Chandola, ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review*, 34.4 (2012), pp. 391–408.

[^3_6]: Special Mention - Sheila Dikshit, https://www.leekuanyewworldcityprize.com.sg/laureates/2010/special-mentions/sheila-dikshit/.

[^3_7]: Poonam Chandra Pandey, ‘Sheila Dixit: Architect of Modern Delhi, Wanted to Develop it like Singapore’, https://morningindia.in/sheila-dikshitarchitect-of-modern-delhi-wanted-to-develop-it-like-singapore/’. Slavoj Zizek, ‘Capitalism with Asian Values’, *Al Jazeera*, 13 November 2011, https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2011/10/2011102813360731764.html.

[^3_8]: The premise of the Bhagidari System (literally translated as‘participatory system’) is to involve ‘citizens’ in the processes of governance so as to make it effective, transparent and collaborative. However, the only citizen groups that are presently involved in the Bhagidari System are the Resident Welfare Association (RWAs) of middle-class, often gated settlements and market traders’associations (MTAs).

[^3_9]: Faiz Ahmed Faiz, ‘Don't Ask Me for That Love Again’, trans. Agha Shahid Ali, in *The Rebel’s Silhouette: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz,* Amherst: Massachusetts UP, 1995, 5.


# 4. The Subaltern as a Political ‘Voyeur’?

> But it also explained that the
> place in which they found themselves prevented from understanding this
> law of domination: they were dominated because they did not
> understand, and they did not understand because they were dominated.
> Which meant that all the efforts they made to struggle against
> domination were themselves blind, trapped by the dominant ideology,
> and that only scientist able to perceive the logic of this circle
> could put them out of their subjection.[^4_1]

## The Rally: Politics at the Crossroads

It is a fine February evening, in more than one ways. I am at the
intersection, yet again. But not a researcher, not awaiting someone to
come and accompany me into the slums. There is no scheduled interview. I
am not a researcher in and at the moment. I am wading along with the
jubilant, intense, some inebriated crowds to celebrate the sweeping,
historic[^4_2] victory for the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) for the 6th Delhi
legislative assembly elections. I share the chorus and chants for the
party's victory, and rejoice in the announcements by the residents of
the slums of Govindpuri that ‘this is **our** victory’, ‘it is **our**
*sarkar* \[government\]’, and ‘now it **our** responsibility to ensure
that the government functions properly’.

The intersection cuts across the Navjeevan and Bhumhiheen camps, on
either side, and meets with the road leading into its
posher-distant-cousins of settlements, Alaknanda, Chittranjan Park and
further into the Greater Kailash territory. Alongside the road, on whose
either side’s slumming spreads out on to it, also are a few middle-class
apartment blocks, Kohinoor and Konark. This road encircles the Navjeevan
and Nehru camps. A trip down this road is for many – uninitiated,
apprehensive and vicariously inclined – the most intimate they get with
the slums. Lacking open spaces within the slums, the encircling road
becomes the arena for the residents of these slums: here, the children
come out to play, wares are sold, people hang about, and markets spread
out. This blatant, unapologetic slumming evokes diverse reactions from
the middle-class neighbours.

A lady, residents of Kohinoor apartment and a professor of political
science in a women’s college in Delhi, articulated it thus:

> I moved into these apartments 20 years back, the price was affordable
> because of there were these slums. But we were assured that they will
> be soon relocated. I am all for the dignity of the poor, and they
> should get proper houses, but does it have to be here? Never in my
> entire stay here have I walked this road \[leading to the
> intersection, passing along the slums\]. And in the last few years
> what with the air-conditioning in the car, I don’t even have to roll
> down the windows. That such a relief.

When further asked had she ever been into slums and how did she reckon
the residents their lived like, ‘hell no, I have never been inside. And
I bet they live packed sardines’. Another residents of the Konark
apartments, also a petitioner in the Public Interest Litigation (PIL)
which sought to remove the slums, whilst maintaining that the presence
of the slums accounted for the nuisance levels (including the
embarrassment it caused to the middle-class residents) admitted that,
‘the presence of the slums, and its people on the roads, lends to the
vibrancy in this area and also makes it cheaper for us to live here’.

The intersection then is an important landmark for both the residents of
the slums and its visitors. During my initial research days, when I
still was not acquainted with the geography of the inner-lanes in the
camps and moved into these spaces with certain apprehension, it was here
at the intersection – *maachi market waali red light \[*red light
outside the fish market\] *–* that I was met with by the residents. In
that, the intersection and the road leading into the slums are the main
arterial link with the world of slums and slumming for those variously
interested: research, activism and politics.

During the time of the elections – Municipal, State, Centre – the road
assumes a renewed importance. The politicians keen to seek the voter
support base of the slums without really slumming it out – venturing
into the lanes of slums – to reach out to the residents. The park,
adjoining the communal toilets on the Bhumhiheen camp side of the road
and Konark apartment block, becomes the congregation grounds during the
times of election. And thus it was not a surprise the victory rally for
Avaatar Singh rode along this road.

I begin with this event to enliven the vibrant, dense and contested
political landscapes the urban poor inhabit. Here, to celebrate AAP’s
historic victory or undertaking a catharsis of this event as a metaphor
is not the intent. The centre-stage is the marginalized space of the
slums in the city, and the attention steadfastly remains on the urban
poor – here, resident of the Govindpuri slums as representative of that
constituency. The poor as an electoral constituency remain an enigma for
most political parties, commentators and pundits during elections at any
jurisdictional level – national, state, municipal: why do the poor cast
their vote? And what determines their allegiance? Patronage? The
‘freebies’? The communal evocations? The caste rhetoric?

The literature, as well as non-poor commonsensical reckoning, abound
with interjections, inquisitions and ‘explanations’ towards this end:
why do the poor vote? However poignant and penetrating these analyses
there is not an absolute answer to this question, and each election
result compels a new set of questions and interjections. And thus how
could not I, as an ethnographer and interlocutor of the lives on the
margins for more than a decade, not feel arrogant enough to undertake
the task, to once and for, answer the overwhelming question, why do the
poor vote?

## The Ethnographer at the Crossroads: Interrogating the Politics of the Subaltern 

Politics is omnipresent, and as an atheist, it is in the realm of the
political, first and foremost and fundamentally, that I locate the
consolidation of one's position within the broader, intersecting
matrices of social, cultural, religious, amongst others. However as an
ethnographer in/of marginalised spaces, in the initial years of my
forays in GP, I found myself hesitant to openly discuss the politics.
Indeed: the focus of the research being undertaken then did not
foreground the political lives of the poor. However, I saw politics of
caste, communal, regional and gendered strategically negotiated and
performed within material realities of the slums, and in turn also
lending to give its particular characteristic. But also, that these very
lens informed the negotiations (and relationships) of the slum-dwellers
with the middle-class residents and spaces which are, more often than
not, predicated on the former being allowed to occupy only a subservient
position. And thus in encounters as such, complex and complicated
trajectories were revealed through which the political self – manifest
in one’s caste, communal, gender, regional identities – were calibrated,
emphasized, negotiated and/or subverted.

Baby has been working in an upper-caste, Tamilian household for the last
twenty years as a domestic worker. When she first went to seek the job,
she was mistaken for a Hindu widow, given the fact that her body was not
marked by the symbolisms which establish the marital status within the
Hindu cosmos; namely, absence of a *mangalsutra, bindi* and bangles. Her
employer, a chaste, upper-caste woman, not only felt kindly towards
Baby, but also hired her at a rate higher than the going one at that
time. During the last twenty years, the family has looked after Baby and
her extended family with some consideration, often paying when health
and education needs in the family demanded investment.

Baby has immense respect for the family. In recounting the chastity of
the household, she talks with certain reverence about their highly
meticulous abstemious practices, especially, in regards to food. They
don’t eat garlic, onions, definitely no meat of any kind. Considering
Baby cooks for them as well, they are convinced she shares their
food-beliefs. Often at this moment of telling, she cannot help being
naughty to wonder aloud, ‘how the hell did these people with so much
money, intelligence and education, just could not figure it out all
these years’. Baby’s real name is Chandbibi, who in the neighbourhood is
known for her delicious buffalo-meat kebabs.

Saroj, of whom I shall speak at length later, was a formidable
politician in Navjeevan camp. She hailed from a lower-caste village in
Uttar Pradesh, but since her early teens had been a resident of Delhi.
One hot, summer afternoon I was visiting her house. We sat on the
*charpoy* in the lane, outside her *jhuggi.*[^4_3] Through the open door I
could see a house sparsely and cleanly organised, the shades were drawn
and from where I was in the heat, the coolness of it was very enticing.
But no such invitation was extended, and thus we sat outside, smoking
(she, *beedi* and I, rollies; and often sharing each other’s).[^4_4]An
hour or so into the conversation I asked for water, the throat was
parched, the heat overwhelming, I was losing focus. Saroj sent out
orders, and I expected a cool tumbler of water to appear in matters of
seconds, after all the open door and the fridge I could see were only a
few meters away. But the wait continued, and so did my desperation.
About 15 minutes later, one of her young sons hurried back with the
2-litre bottle of Coke and a couple of plastic glasses. They were
filled, and I was offered one. I refused, ‘I don’t drink Coke, and I
really, really do want water, can I please just have some?’. In my
breaking voice, the desperation was evident.

Another nod from Saroj, and this time the water did materialise in
matter of seconds. As I was guzzling the cool water, Saroj remarked,
with a slight amusement in her voice, ‘but people like you, even in the
slums, don’t drink water or eat at our place’. The upper-caste
inscription which my body carries and hard as I try, I cannot scrub it
off, and surely never announce, had led to the anxiousness which it was
reckoned the ultimate metonym of capitalist-consumerist celebration, a
Coke, could resolve. There are more than many such encounters and
instances wherein gender, caste, communal, regional distances and
differences are maintained: people of different caste will not drink or
eat in other’s houses; sometimes they will not enter into each other's
houses, having the entire social interactions at the doorsteps for
years, and certain lanes are avoided on account of certain kinds of
people living in those camps in the slums.

The practices in the immediate, intimate realm, whether be of culinary
preferences and prejudices; the nostalgic continuation of regional
traditions, even if the region (the village) had not been visited in
their living histories; the peculiar sense of fashion, which both
determines the shades of decency but also ‘daring’ (as it is articulated
especially by the youth to challenge the traditional norms); the shifts
in notion of leisure and utilization of time, and the anxieties about it
among other sections in GP, are not merely a manifestation of the
interiority of cultural identities being produced and performed in
public. But, I insist, that in these everyday, ‘banal’, *apolitical*
activities, the political selves of the residents of GP is foregrounded
– inadvertently, unwittingly, and also not without a certain
deliberation – and is at once a response to the material realities of
being a slum-dweller, but also the broader dialectical relationships
within which these are produced.

And thus to return to my own position as an ethnographer, even though
aware of these complexities, I found myself unable to take the bull by
its horns, so to say, to ask the residents of GP, what is your political
position? What informs it? Who do you vote for? What does casting a vote
mean? What sense of entitlements, rights do you expect from the
government you voted in? How do you respond when the candidates, parties
you voted in do not respond to your needs? And in setting these specific
questions as the only ones resolving the overwhelming question (oh, why
do the poor vote?) I was committing a double whammy of a research (and
by extension intellectual and political) faux pas in absenting from the
banal, apolitical, everyday practices of the residents of GP their
political selves.

Whilst it is tempting to attribute naiveté, lack of experience to this
blind spot in discussing with the residents of GP their political selves
and ecologies during the initial research period, the personal
hesitation and unease to discuss these concerns with the slum-dwellers
(as a middle-class, educated, upper-caste individual) is in fact
representative of the broader and fundamental anxiety to engage with the
marginalised, the identified others. In this essay, it is the others in
their political presences and performances that hold the centre-stage.

## But, Why Should We *Not* Vote? 

Between late 2012 and early 2013, following up to the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (MCD) elections, I focused on the manner in which
residents of GP were mobilized by different parties and the role of
local leaders within the slums. As a researcher, I was more confident
and confrontational in my research agendas and questions than my initial
forays into GP.

Amidst the intricate, incestuous and maze-like lanes of GP, the summer
afternoons are like an older relative having a nap, around whom the
children uncontainable enthusiasm have to tip-toe, lest they wake them
and invite their wrath. The winter afternoons, on the contrary, are like
a never-ending blanket that is being woven by the old and young alike,
spread out on the terraces, squat in precious corners where the sun has
not died, collectively adding to its warmth. The winter of 2012 was no
different, except along with the tales and talks of the everyday, the
know-how about the neighbours, and what was happening in another’s
house, the afternoons were enlivened by the announcements by
representatives of different political parties contesting the MCD
elections; meetings to ‘get-to-know’ the candidate; and the speculative
conversations about each candidate’s politics and their proposed
agendas.

As researcher, with a very precise focus to resolve the identified
question, the matter of the different political parties, their
histories, the profile of the respective candidates, the presence in the
slums and their past achievements and interventions in the slums was not
a concern. But the conversations in GP were replete with these
discussions, more specifically targeted towards a character appraisal of
the candidates from different parties. The matter of their personal
fortune; their businesses; love affairs; benevolence; corruption; the
arm-strength each candidate could yield via the *goons* in each of the
camps, among many other facets, were discussed to threadbare
repetitions. From my *then* naive position of reckoning that the
political of the poor is a distinct, separate entity – almost as an
astral form floating over and above - from the *banality* of the
everyday, I found these conversations tiring. But I persisted, perhaps
awaiting a fate like Ali Baba’s to chance upon the magic words, *open
sesame,* to enter into this astral political realm, where ideologies,
revolutions, utopia would be discussed, aspired and designed towards. I
started to suspect everyone of Morgiana’s deftness and cunning to keep
me out.

One of the most common refrains, after a candidate had been reproached
for an action or other, or indeed praised for a redeeming act, was that
after the reverie of the elections, the meetings, the rallies, the
fascination of freebies and the grand promises into the future were
over, and one or the other candidate had won, the jhuggi-walahs will be
left to their fate, to fend for themselves and nothing was going to
change. This sentiment was particularly exaggerated one afternoon in
Baby’s lane.

When the candidate for whom Baby had been appointed to organise a ‘meet
and greet’ gathering did not turn up, instead sending his deputy laden
with samosas and ladoos for the attending women, the disappointment and
resentment was particularly severe.[^4_5] Baby’s sister-in-law, and her
neighbour, have a fraught relationship. Their loud recriminations of
every aspect and each member of other’s lives are commonplace, followed
with much interest by the neighbours for its abusive, obscene and often
simply jocular affects. Since the campaigning for the elections had
started, and Baby had agreed to be an agent for the candidate in
question, Baby and her sister-in-law’s relationship had taken a turn for
the worse. Baby did not leave any opportunity to exhibit and perform her
newly acquired importance as an agent, proximity to the candidate and
lending a suggestive air about herself that she indeed was in the
know-how of what ensues in the inner circles. And thus when the much
deliberated event was a no-show, and Baby publicly shamed, how could the
sister-in-law miss the opportunity to rub salt into the wounds?

The sister-in-law is a garrulous woman of bulbous proportions. When she
is present, she does not only defiantly occupy the space, she indeed
becomes the space. Considering not only Baby, personally, but the
jhuggi-walllahs*,* collectively, had been humiliated by the candidate’s
no-show, the sister-in-law could not hurl a direct assault at Baby,
instead in the manner of the ‘voice, the great deep cry of \[the\] Fog
Horn shuddering through the rags of mist’, pronounced, her heaving,
heavy breasts sans the *dupatta* punctuating her performance, ‘we have
to cast our vote, irrespective of the fact that nothing ever happens.
Our fate is worse than that of the whores. We will have to fuck someone,
someone will fuck us, whether we get anything or not. Well, let’s vote
for Baby’s candidate this time, after all she is one of ours’.[^4_6]

An otherwise unapologetic woman, Baby had shrunk becoming the corner she
was leaning against. Baby was my introduction to this lane in Navjeevan
camp, and I had shared her enthusiasm in getting things in order for the
now no-show ‘meet and greet’ (if only to understand the intricate
workings of political mobilization in the slums). I realised that in
such a pronouncement irrespective of whether the said candidate won or
lost, it would be reckoned Baby’s responsibility for ‘nothing happening’
for the next five years and for its residents to have been yet again
*fucked over. *

I intervened, and with a certain sense of permission that I could. The
strict researcher-researched, self-other boundaries were already
blurring. I put out the overwhelming question, in almost a manner of
reproach to those present for *ganging up* on baby, which I had been yet
been waiting to ask at the opportune moment (perhaps when I had in fact
chanced upon the *political* of the poor), ‘so, why do you vote then?’.

The question drew exclusively attention to me, and a momentary stern
silence was followed by a collective question (Baby had immediately
shifted sides as well) in the manner spoken to the child who had missed
the basics of multiplication: ‘But, why should we *not* vote?’

‘Well’, I continued, sensing that I finally have to tell the others what
they don’t know, all of you keep on insisting that nothing happens,
that the politicians just use you for the vote, they treat you nicely
only during the elections, and after that no development takes places,
and things don’t change, then why do you vote?’. The conversation, now
almost combative continued, ‘but still what has nothing happening, no
improvement, corrupt politicians have to do with why we should not
vote?’

## The Theatre of the Political and the Subaltern as Unrealised Characters

Both Baby’s sister-in-law’s pronouncement, and the following assertion
about casting the vote among the residents of GP, set in motion an
intellectual paralysis and stasis. As if all this time, my engagement
with the poor had been the Rorschach test being read upside down. Of
course, why ought not the poor vote? And when they in fact do, why ought
their choices be put under threadbare examination in regards to their
motivations, awareness and engagement with not only the democratic ideas
but also the working of the systems and processes? In the analyses to
address the overwhelming question – why do the poor vote - the
underlying sentiment is that the unique vibrancy of the Indian
democratic system (though what makes it unique in fundamental,
foundational ways is never really spelled out) and the society’s
inherent pluralistic and accommodative character extends *hope* to the
poor, even though their predicament remains more or less unchanged.

The rationale for the poor’s presence, unrelenting participation and
performance identifies and emotional core responding to the hope
candidate, the party’s rhetoric and theatrical rallies can evoke. On the
other hand, the tendency of the non-poor not to vote, especially at the
most local jurisdictional level of Municipal elections, is accorded to
an informed decision premised on disconnect, apathy and dismay with the
democratic and political systems, processes and their functioning. Of
course, I am presenting a rather simplistic condensation of these
analyses, poignant and pertinent in their significant ways. And the
intent is not to either critique or contribute to these discussions.

The seemingly straightforward question, ‘So, why do you vote then?’,
were the magic words to open and enter the astral realm of political of
the poor I had been desperately seeking for. The question of why, how,
whom and towards what end the poor vote for were all at once rendered
inconsequential if they were not teased out, approached and explored
within the ‘particular conception of the world[^4_7]’ the slum-dwellers,
the poor, those on the margins, inhabit.

The ‘particular conception of world’ the poor, subaltern, marginalised
have, lending them their peculiarity, is not a symptom of their poverty,
marginalisation and subalternity. Instead, poverty itself is the
condition of concrete historical, geographical social, political
processes, grounded in the broader material realities and dialectical
relationships. In order to engage with the political (here, with the
intent to understand why and how the poor vote) of the poor, or for that
matter any facet of their lives which cannot simply be viewed in
isolation, these processes, their historicity – however contemporary –
must be foregrounded to insist on the vulnerability, precarity and
unliviability as these are the axis along with which the bodies of the
poor in their corporeality and their presences in dispersed abstractions
(political, cultural, social) exist.

Without such an undertaking, the subaltern, the poor, the marginalised
(of each and every order, category and constant calibration) shall be
stuck sharing the fate of Pirandello’s unrealised characters.[^4_8] And
thus I abandoned the project of once and for all neatly resolving the
overwhelming question*,* but I also did not assume the role of the
elusive author who would finally allow the subaltern as *characters* to
realise themselves. In short, I became one of the unrealised characters,
whose predicament and politics was not determined by the *condition* of
poverty, but was nevertheless in search of a narrative (and author)
which could allow for an ethical cohabitation with the subalterns, the
poor, and those on the margins.

## Enter the Booth: Politics without the Politics

By late December, 2012, I extensively and intimately started following
the everyday of two women leaders, both affiliated with the right-wing
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Saroj and Saiddya. The two of them made an
unlikely pair. Saroj, who passed away in 2014, was a wiry,
*beedi*-smoking, lower-caste woman. Saiddya hails from a middle-caste,
Muslim family. As flamboyant as Saroj was, uninhibited in making her
presence felt and claiming the space, Saiddya presents herself with a
demure but definite sense of self. The pair of them piqued my interest
as both of them representatives of their constituencies – lower-caste
Hindu and Middle-caste Muslim, respectively – are traditionally reckoned
to face the wrath (the intent of a discipling agenda) of the right-wing
Rashtriya Swamay Sevak (RSS) backed, BJP rhetoric.[^4_9]

In the task assigned to mobilise women to vote for BJP in the upcoming
elections, and as I followed them, there were no speeches, pamphlets to
be distributed, either an excited celebration of BJP’s candidate for
councilour from the area or a hectic criticism of the opposing
candidates. The matters that dealt with were everyday and commonplace.
The difficulties, roadblocks, the families – either visiting or who were
paid a visit - were encountering whilst dealing with the different state
agencies, hospitals, police, legal matters, as also domestic disputes
and the manner in which Saroj and Saiddya’s interventions (owing to
their proximity to the candidate) mitigated these issues.

Of the two Saiddya was the more restraint and demure one; as Saroj would
jocularly comment, ‘of the two us she is the respectable one, that is
why she goes to the schools and hospitals, I am the bloody loudmouth
that is why I have to deal with the goons, sister-fucker of men who beat
up their wives and the cops’.

And indeed Saroj, weighing less 50 Kgs, held her might with aplomb. It
was spending afternoons with her that I had my lessons which refined and
sophisticated my engagement with the politics of the subaltern. She
would command – everything she did, even a smile, gravitas of a command
– space, respect and attention, and indeed got it. And I felt highly
privileged to be taken under her patronage. After wandering about the
lanes, a *charpoy* would be summoned, almost blocking the passage (but
who could dare to complain), Saroj would spread her meagre self on it
and I would be the only one allowed to sit on it next to her. The first
time two glasses, filled to the brim with undiluted, dark rum, were
served to Saroj and I in the afternoon, I was slightly taken aback and
my hesitation was very evident. After the initial performance of
chastity, I used to smoke openly, and share drinks with friends in GP,
but before this had never done publicly.

In her classic style, Saroj slapped her thighs, and laughed, ‘listen, I
know you are like me, we are just the same, I realised this the moment I
saw you. You are very courageous, and you are not a cheat, but you are
definitely not one those ‘nice, virtuous’ ones, so drink up’.

In re-listening to the conversations, recorded during those few months,
whilst drinking rum, smoking, sharing the most intimate aspects of our
lives, deliberating politics, I am at once overwhelmed with gratitude
for the wealth of wisdom, lived experience and insights Saroj shared
with me, and taken by a child-like fancy to click my heels and dance for
her approval of me. In that, this essay is a tribute to Saroj's memory,
the organic intellectual and philosopher par excellence. I learned my
first practical lesson in the possibilities of ethical cohabitation, as
a praxis and practice.

The conversations, long and winding, often without a specific beginning
and usually with an abrupt end, were uninhibited, often confusing and
combative. Whilst my debt to Saroj in my engagement with the political
of the poor is surmount, the voices which guided me through were many
and abounded in their multiplicities. Saroj, here, is evoked as a
medium, a channel, and a mouthpiece of these voices, which all did not
sing in unison, there were conflicts and tensions.

On one of these afternoons, I finally raised Saroj the question which
had been bothering me since I was first introduced to Saiddya and her,
‘we know how BJP talks about the lower-castes, the Muslims (the
demolition of Babri Masjid had been a topic of discussion between us),
then how do the two of you reconcile to being associated with a party
which is so openly anti-Muslims and so upper-caste?’

> Of course, we are aware of that, but is it only BJP who is anti-Muslim
> and lower-caste? You tell me? Everyone is, consciously,
> subconsciously, if not anti-Muslim definitely thinking through jati
> (caste), even the Muslims. I won't even blame the upper-caste of being
> jaati-waadi (caste-biased), even I, the bloody bhangi (lower-caste) I
> am, I won't let my children marry someone lower than us in jaati. When
> it comes to the roj-maara ki baat (everyday practices), it does not
> matter, but when there are long-term consequences – like, marriages –
> I am not going to take the chance. I know it is wrong, I suffer it.
> People will sit at my feet, ask me for my help, let me sort out their
> lives, but they will not drink water from my house. Of course I know
> it is wrong, but do I have the strength, courage and will to affect
> change, no. Perhaps if I were rich enough, I would be more
> khule-dimaag ki (open-minded, liberal).
>
> What do you mean? Should you of all the people not be standing up,
> fighting against everything that is wrong? What they say, about the
> lower-castes, the jhuggi-wallahs?
>
> Beta (My child; even though Saroi and I were spared of only a few
> years in age, she commanded the space of a wizened person, and always
> referred to me as Beta, a term of endearment I was only glad to be
> showered with), what makes you think I have not been fighting my life?
> I had to sort out my husband, he was bloody abusive, older to me by
> almost 15 years and got married to me when I was about 15. Now he is
> hurled up in that little room, bastard scared to come out, but he beat
> me up. I worked in people's houses, at construction sites, I was here
> in the jhuggi's when it was a big, bloody swamp. What makes you think
> I have not been fighting my whole life?.
>
> ‘Yes, I get it, the life in the jhuggi's was difficult and you have
> managed so much, you command so much respect, and do much for the
> people, but you still are associated with the BJP. They are anti-
> lower-caste, women, Muslims. Why?’.
>
> Garibi se badi koi sachai nahi hoti (There is no bigger truth than
> poverty). You think I will stand for anyone hurting Saiddya or any
> Muslim family here, of course no. That time has not come here, and I
> will not stand for that kind of injustice and violence against anyone.
> But then I also do not shy from thrashing the men (and their mothers)
> who harass their wives, daughter-in-laws, is that OK then? BJP is in
> charge of the municipality, and their people at the local level listen
> to me, give me izzat (respect), get my work done, get me the izzat I
> get here. That will do for me until the time for a decision comes. If
> I had the monies, if I did not have to sit at the feet of the BJP
> people for years like the people you see here sitting, I would have
> had the luxury of taking sides more clearly. Garibi bhi ek dharam hota
> hai, beta \[Poverty becomes a religion of sorts, my child\].
>
> But what about the State elections, the general elections, what is
> your role in those elections? Do you still remain unaffected by what
> each party candidate is saying?
>
> Dekho bhai, aisa hai, \[See, this is how it is\], when there are the
> “big” elections, then we have to go, then we do take women for
> rallies, they get blankets, shawls, it is a bit like a picnic. That is
> a different game, we \[as party workers\] don't have much to do with
> it. But when the MCD elections happen, they have to come here, when
> the matter of concern is “here”, where else will they hold the rally.
> Now bloody hell tell me, how many candidates want to roam the lanes of
> the slums, so we get their work done’.

During these winter afternoons in late 2012- early 2013, I found myself
intensely engaged in the density of the everyday life of the
slum-dwellers, especially the political. In these discussions I had
anticipated an animated discussion about the recently concluded India
Against Corruption[^4_10] (IAC) movement (April 2011-November 2012) which
had led to the emergence of a new political party, Aam Aadmi Party (AAP)
from within the section of protesting leaders.[^4_11]

‘Did you organise people, especially the women, to go to Jantar
Mantar[^4_12], to take part in the protests against the whole corruption
prevalent in the country?’.In asking this question, I retrospectively
realise my folly to reckon that the *poor* had naturally allied to the
cause; even though in my distant analyses of the movement (from
Singapore) I had presented a highly critical evaluation of it in regards
to the participation of the middle-classes and the framing of corruption
within a cleanliness discourse.

> Of course, it was everywhere, on the TV, news, and we did follow it
> closely. The Gandhi-jaisa aadmi (reference to Anna Hazare) was
> admirable, to sit there, not eating, fighting for the cause of
> corruption. But, firstly, none of the political parties came here to
> “round us” up in the buses, with promises of blankets or lunches, as
> is usually the case. How the hell are we supposed to go all the way,
> paying for the fare, missing out on the work on our own, except when
> we are taken? But also, samaaj mein nahin aaya ki matlab kya tha \[but
> we did not quite understand the meaning of the whole protest\].
> Bilkul, ghuskori kharab hai, galat cheez hai \[yes, giving bribes is a
> wrong thing\], but you tell me, how do we survive without giving guss
> \[bribe\]? Matlab, the thula \[colloquial term to refer to the cops\]
> who asks for a 100 here and there, is he wrong? Do you know what he
> earns? He is one of us, we don't think of it as ghus.

Then Saroj went to explain and implicate herself in the *danda of
gusskori* \[the business of bribing, and thus by that extension being
corrupt\].

> Beta, let me tell you this. There was this woman in the lane, newly
> married and had altercations with her husband and in-laws. She was a
> very feisty woman, I liked her for that, but she was also very quick
> of temper. I tried to talk her through, I even said, if she wants to
> leave the husband and her marital home, I will sort it out. But one
> day, god knows on what whim, she left her child out in the lane,
> closed the door and set herself to fire, leaving a message on her
> phone that her in-laws were setting her to fire. I know that wasn't
> true. I was here. The husband and the mother-in-law were away. I had
> to palm the investigating thulas with money to not regard phone
> messages, and other negotiations. Don't get me wrong, I am not saying
> that the husband and his mother were saintly, but they did not kill
> the girl. At best they could be accused of harassment, but murder.
> That wasn't fair. And yes for the running along, pulling the strings,
> negotiating with the cops and lawyers and finally letting them off
> with a case of harassment but not murder, I charged 10,000. Of this I
> paid the amounts to the cops, etc., but also kept almost half as my
> fee. I do not see this as corruption, it is a service I am providing.
> The poor thulas they know everything, but have such little powers, and
> do you know what they earn for the work they do? I am supporting them
> too. What is wrong with that? How else would they got justice?

In the framing of the corruption as a social malice, the IAC movement
specifically insisted on the role of the people who *give* bribes in
perpetuating corruption, highlighting their immorality in this
complicity. Here, then the voices intervened questioning their own
participation? Is it corrupt to give money to get the child into school?
To get an identity card made? What do they mean by black money*,* for us
money is like magic, it disappears as soon we lay eyes on it, one of the
congregating woman jocularly remarked. Of course, everyone agreed.

With the Municipal Corporation of Delhi elections only a few weeks away,
I raised questions not about why they vote in abstraction, but the
grounded practices of it: who they will vote for? Whose campaign seemed
effective? Which candidate? In raising these questions, I was hoping to
arrive at the epistemological, reflexive processes through which
'decisions' are made, and the manner in agency and structure were
negotiated in a Bourdieuian sense.

The responses at the most fundamental level seemed frivolous to me: ‘we
vote because we can’. That was the most common refrain, the much touted
celebration of the practice of the poor voting as exercising their right
was not asserted as vehemently as I had read/expected. Of course, in my
naïveté then I failed to identify the capacity to act (in the action of
casting a vote) in itself an event of assertion of agency. One man, a
first-time voter in the coming elections, announced, ‘I will be voting
for Congress’. *Who is the candidate? ‘*I don't know the candidate, the
family has been voting for Congress ever since, and how can we betray
the legacy of Mahatma Gandhi!’. *I don't understand,* I said. ‘Well,
they are descendants of Mahatma Gandhi, Indira was his daughter’.
*Well,* I interjected, *that wasn't the case. Indira Gandhi was Nehru's
daughter, she was married to a man whose last name was the same as
Gandhi. ‘*She was a Gandhi, right, and of Congress, *hum tho haat ko
denge* \[we will vote for the 'hand', the Congress party's symbol\]’.

‘*Aap kisko vote dete ho?’ (w*hom do vote for?), I was under the
inquisition and scrutiny of those, including Saroj, whose political
motivations I had until then putting under microscopic examination. I
fumbled, I was embarrassed until then (2012) I had not cast my vote in
*any* of the elections in the country – General, State and Municipal. In
fact, I didn't even have a voter's identification to be eligible to cast
the vote. I told them as much. ‘So, you cannot vote. *Yeh tho bahut
chutiyapa hai* \[this is such a bummer\]. Saroj mausi (an aunt –
mother's sister, and as she was referred to by one and all) can get you
made one, you know’. Saroj nodded, and added, ‘no charge for you’. The
*act* of not casting the vote in fact cast a shadow of doubt on my
politics as event, ‘*tho koi party koh support kaise karte ho?’ (*so,
how do you show your support to any party?)’.

Political being the only terrain in and through which I negotiated my
own identity, I feel ambushed. I took on to give a brief history of my
political engagement with the left*,* my involvement with All India
Students Association (student wing of the Communist Party of India
(Marxist–Leninist) Liberation) as student at Jawaharlal Nehru
University, the commitment to the agenda of the left*,* workers
revolutions, instilling revolutionary consciousness, the concerns with
class struggles, against caste and communal tendencies, etc. They gave
me a patient hearing, until Saroj interrupted rather irritably, ‘*Beta,*
this party, whichever it is, seems the one we should be aligning with,
right? They work for us, but pray tell me one thing, why haven't we
heard of them before this? Why haven't any of their representatives come
to us? Where are they?’.

I was silenced in humility. The ‘organic intellectual’ had made a
pronouncement resounding the anxieties of Ranciere's cited earlier. And
thus we returned to the act of voting – not as a metaphor, or the
burdens of its memory – but as an event in an asserting agency.

Yet again, evoking Saroj as the mouthpiece, the loudspeaker, the
channel, the medium, for the multitudinous and multiplicities of the
*voices*,

> Hum vote karte hain, koi ki kar saakte hai \[We vote because we can\].
> A while back you were asking about people selling their votes, and
> even if they have committed to voting for someone, got the money, why
> don't they vote for someone else? Yahan pe kutch maslee hain \[there
> are a few issues here\], how many things do you think we have we can
> sell and ask the price we want, negotiate? Vote is a thing, which can
> be sold, and better still we don't lose the thing, it comes to us in
> another five years, at least thrice. Unlike house, jewelry we have to
> sell. But that does not mean, everyone sells their vote, or can simply
> be incited by daru \[alcohol\]. There is something called ethical
> practice of transaction, here most transactions are based on trust,
> and so when we do say, we will take the money and vote for you, we are
> honouring that trust and transaction. When we enter the booth, even
> though we go together in groups and usually if the party is taking us,
> there will be festivities, everyone is on their own. They are thinking
> for themselves, it could be the money they have taken, the kindness a
> candidate had shown, or some work they had done, or perhaps not done.
> You ask repeatedly, why support BJP as a Muslim? Why vote for that
> candidate when he has a case pending? Why not vote for the party which
> has said they will do something about the slum-dwellers? But, beta,
> when we enter the booth, anyone of us, we are not only just
> jhuggi-walahs, or woman, or Muslim, or bhangi (lower-caste), or garib
> (poor), yes, we are all of that, but in the booth, we are also
> absolutely alone, who is to say, eh?

A young, pretty lady, a domestic-worker by profession, an attentive
audience to these conversations, one of the afternoons, amused by the
fervour of the discussions, breaking the decorum of interrupting Saroj
(an act which otherwise invited severe reprimand from her, had it not
been for the pretty lady's youthful exuberance and infectious
excitement), ‘When the voter registration comes which also has a photo,
it feels really nice. Taking that slip to the booth is so much fun, and
when I go in I press whichever button fancies me’.

Saroj smiled at her indulgently, and said to her, ‘*Beta*, this time,
when we are going to the booth, you come with us, we will have even more
fun’.

## The Subaltern as Political Voyeur

The discussions about the politics of the poor in Govindpuri in
2012-2013 highlighted the resonances of the India Against Corruption
movement (IAC) of 2011 and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) 201s
amongst its residents. In 2015, I also closely followed the involvement
of the residents with the Delhi Legislative Assembly elections. Each of
these events as they unfolded within the ecology of Govindpuri are
deserving undertakings on their own, and a reading of these three
political moments in conjunctions only lends to further nuanced reading
(and thus revealing) of the ‘organic, political’ selves of its
residents.

The imagined, projected call of a clean, corruption free India did not
hold much resonance here. It was, as discussed through the narratives,
not on account of the idea of corruption, and thus its absences, as
incomprehensible, but the linear and collapsible identification of the
corrupt with immorality, greed and to a far-fetched extent being
anti-national. The fact of everyday lives of living on the margins
compels negotiating with the state, its authorities and the mainstream
through a network of tacit arrangements and exchanges, more often than
not, humiliating and disenfranchising for the poor. Do they want to
continually experience it? If they had a choice, would they still do it,
were the rhetorical questions raised to be answered in the negative. Of
course not. Would they not want services, goods and their rightful
demands to be fulfilled without succumbing to these tactics? Of course
yes. But what to do? Without these corrupt practices, left to their own
devices by the State, they would perish.

In their rejection of the so-reckoned ‘second struggle for freedom’, the
slum-dwellers reveal with an astute sensibility a sociological-political
reality, which a lot of commentators and enthusiast of the movement
sustained an amnesia about in its celebration, that corruption is a
structural and systemic concern, its practices unfolding in the social
realm (caste being its pivotal and obscenest manifestation) is far more
detrimental than the financial exchanges. In fact, the latter relies on
the former to exact and exaggerate its benefits.

In the immediate political ecology of the MCD 2013, elections,
epitomised in the two women, Saidyya and Saroj, the arbiters of
political agendas of the parties within the slums, reveal political
sensibilities, vocabularies and capacities to negotiate the concerns of
caste, gender, amongst others categories, towards a census and/or
conflict. These negotiations are poignantly revealing in more ways than
one: they highlight that the slums, and its residents, are not a
homogenised whole, and that to achieve the desired political end an
*insider* is indeed needed as the ploy of ‘empty’ promises and
incentives is just not enough.

During the celebrations of the Delhi Assembly Elections results on 10
February 2015, the repeated insistence of the party's victory being
theirs and the responsibility to ensure good governance shared by them
with the elected members, the residents of GP at once emphasized the
importance of their participation in AAP's success and claimed ongoing
partnership with the state. Along with these insistences the residents
reiterated that they had exercised this political mandate out of their
own will, and that they had not succumbed to either incentives,
coercions or considerations of identity politics (all implicated in
other political rallies that I have observed) to bring to fruition the
'*andolan',* movement, which AAP as a party had set out to accomplish by
ensuring their sweeping victory in the Delhi elections 2015. In this
political performance, the residents' revealed a highly matured and
assured political self.

And here, I return to the thought with which I started the essay. And to
the misplaced reckoning of the ‘scientist’, the lot of which I am often
associated with and the association I vehemently oppose, that the
dominated do not in fact understand the laws and logic of domination. It
is a matter of deliberation to not allow the task of meaning-making of
the ‘self’ to the subaltern as it then allows to obliterate the ‘self’
of the subaltern in its corporeality, only to be engaged in its
abstractions. As evidenced through the narratives here, the subaltern is
not only aware of the rules of the games of domination but also knows
how to subvert and disrupt it, even though only slightly and, more often
than not without, any substantial impact.

In fact, through the performance of political ‘naivety’ – *what do we
know? What can we do? -* expected of them, the slum-dwellers demonstrate
an astute awareness of the experience of poverty they are expected to
perform, especially when encountering State agents, civil society
workers and politicians, to accrue financial assistance, subsidies and
other benefits. The performance to accrue immediate and extended
‘benefits’ is often confused with their compromised and absent political
core, a reckoning which the grounded experiences of the political of the
poor puncture.

In each of these three events, India Against Corruption 2011, as
*rejection* to the movement's premise*;* the engagement with the MCD
elections 2012, *claiming stakes*; and in the celebration towards the
victory of AAP in Delhi Assembly elections as an event of *political
participation and collaboration,* the slum-dwellers exhibit a highly
mature engagement with the political landscape of the present in its
imagined, immediate and extended ecologies.

Even though these three events highlight the ‘organic, political’ self
of the slum-dwellers, as a representative constituency of the subaltern,
the tapestry of being and becoming it unfolds within is revealing of a
finer, intricately woven, sometimes fragile, designs. The slum-dweller,
she, is at once astute and street-smart; she knows what she wants, but
sometimes is lead ashtray; she gives in to her desires with a reckless
ferocity, but she also holds on to her grounds, when she wants, putting
at stake her most intense desires and immediate needs. If she knows the
lanes of the slums, reckoned dreaded and dark by those who have never
ventured into, like a sorcerer, she is not lacking in the knowledge,
desire and imagination of the highways and super-highways out there. In
short, she is an argumentative, intuitive, emotional, not without the
intent of self-interest, inquisitive, imaginative, deliberative whole.

Poverty is a compelling and difficult text to read, and its committed
readers few and far between. In engaging with the politics of the poor,
it is easier to reckon, identify the political as existing in isolation,
a seductive temptation so as not to concern oneself with the messiness
of the processes, structures, systems which produce and systematically
sustain poverty. Moreover, in engaging with the political of the poor,
detached from their diverse sensibilities and sentimentalities, it
becomes convenient and commonplace to expect the commitment of the poor
to the predicament of poverty to violent, loyalties; such that, the poor
then can be (and are allowed) only to be poor, devoid of emotions,
aspirations and desires. However: Poverty does not happen in isolation,
and nor does politics and poetics. The subaltern knows, lives and
experiences it well.

The State and the hegemonic narratives, deliberately deny the poor the
capacity to imagine, inquire and emote. And if it is in fact extended to
them, it is only within the terms of excesses, threatening to tear the
seams of the social fabric. And in this identification, as definite
structural and systemic tactics, the poor, the marginalised, the
disenfranchised, the subaltern, is recognised as an ‘imbecile’, lacking
a core, logic and sense of ‘self’. The plans and policies that are thus
envisaged for this constituency not only absent their presences – as
they do not know they are present – but are always predicated on the
project of disciplining them towards an evolutionary agenda of
incorporating them into the normative social, cultural, political order.

And it is within this schematic that I evoke the imagery of the
subaltern as a 'voyeur', seeking intellectual, theoretical and real
permissions for the subaltern to be voyeuristic. The State engages with
the subaltern as *voyeur* in its aimless and senseless wanderings, which
it then translates as necessitating the agenda of containing, silencing
and disciplining the subaltern. However, the subaltern as a *voyeur* in
its second avatar is possessed of imaginations, inquisitions and
emotions to draw out its own maps, where its coordinates are steadfastly
located (and thus allowing it capacities to shift back, forth and
sideways), and these mappings are populated with many of its selves,
spaces, and histories.

Thus, in celebrating the voyeurism *of the subaltern*, the intent is to
recognise and engage with the ‘organic, political’ self of the
subaltern, with all the misconceptions, misgivings and multiplicities
she possesses. This is not merely an ambitious, well-intentioned,
romantic agenda; without allowing for the imaginations, inquisitions and
emotions of the subaltern, the project of the realisation of a truly
democratic, ethical, equitable and just social, cultural and political
order remains and shall so, a distant dream.

##References
Bradbury, Ray. ‘The Fog Horn’,
https://archive.org/stream/TheFogHorn/TheFogHorn.txt.

Gramsci, Antonio. ‘The Intellectuals’, in *Selections from the Prison
Notebooks,* Q. Hoare and G. N. Smith (eds) New York:
International Publishers, 1971, pp. 3-23.

Kumar, Sanjay. ‘Interpreting the AAP Win’, *The Hindu,* 11 February
2015,
https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/interpreting-the-aap-win/article6879316.ece.

Pirandello, Luigo. *'Six Characters in Search of an Author’*, trans.
John Linstrum, London: Methuen Drama, 1991.

Rancière, Jacques. *Proletarian Nights: The Workers' Dream in
Nineteenth-century France,* trans. John Durry, New York: Verso Trade,
2012, pp. 31-32.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Slum in the Time of Politics’, *Business Standard*,
21 January 2013,
https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/slum-in-the-time-of-politics-112030400055\_1.html.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Getting a Rise’, *Business Standard*, 25 January
2013,
https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/getting-a-rise-112080500044\_1.html.

Wikipedia Contributors, ‘India Against Corruption’, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India\_Against\_Corruption, accessed 4 April 2020.

[^4_1]: Jacques Rancière, *Proletarian Nights: The Workers' Dream in Nineteenth-century France,* trans. John Durry, New York: Verso Trade, 2012, pp. 31-32.

[^4_2]: Sanjay Kumar, ‘Interpreting the AAP Win’, *The Hindu,* 11 February 2015, https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/interpreting-the-aap-win/article6879316.ece.

[^4_3]: A bedstead of woven webbing or hemp stretched on a wooden frame on four legs.

[^4_4]: Beedi is a thin South Asian cigarette made of 0.2-0.3 grams of tobacco flake wrapped in a tendu (Diospyrox melanoxylon) leaf and secured with coloured thread at both ends.

[^4_5]: Indian savoury and sweet snacks commonly served at communal gatherings.

[^4_6]: Ray Bradbury, ‘The Fog Horn’, https://archive.org/stream/TheFogHorn/TheFogHorn.txt.

[^4_7]: Antonio Gramsci, ‘The Intellectuals’, in *Selections from the Prison Notebooks,* Q. Hoare and G. N. Smith (eds) New York: International Publishers, 1971, pp 3-23.

[^4_8]: Luigi Pirandello, ‘*Six Characters in Search of an Author’,* trans. John Linstrum, London: Methuen Drama, 1991.

[^4_9]: I wrote journalistically about the MCD elections covering the profile of Saroj and Saiddya, Tripta Chandola, ‘Slum in the time of politics’, *Business Standard,* 21 January 2013, https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/slum-in-the-time-of-politics-112030400055\_1.html.

[^4_10]: Wikipedia Contributors, ‘India Against Corruption’, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India\_Against\_Corruption, accessed 4 April 2020.

[^4_11]: In these journalistic articles I reported on the last day of the IAC's protest at Jantar Mantar here: https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/getting-a-rise-112080500044\_1.html; and here: https://countercurrents.org/chandola090812.htm.

[^4_12]: Jantar Mantar is an astronomical historical momument in Delhi. It was a prominent site for holding protests on which following National Green Tribunal ordinance was shut down in 2018. Now prior permissions are required to hold protests here, Aniruddha Ghosal, ‘End of a protest: The story of Jantar Mantar as a protest site began in 1993’, *Indian Express,* 26 June 26 2018, https://indianexpress.com/article/india/jantar-mantar-protests-ngt-end-of-a-protest-2011-lokpal-agitation-anna-hazare-4922867/



# 5. Collaborative Listening: On Producing a Radio Documentary in the Govindpuri Slums 

*With Tom Rice[^5_1]*

It was almost midnight when we started our sojourns. We, Tom and I, were
going to attend a jagran – a night long event in celebration of one god
or another, of the many in the Hindu pantheon, marked by musical and
theatrical performances – being held in the park opposite Navjeevan camp
and adjacent to Bhumhiheen camp. Jagrans, in any context, are rarely
just about evoking the gods; they are about communities coming together
and such. In the Govindpuri jhuggis, there significance is elevated on
account of several factors. The residents of the three camps - owing to
the lack of space and resources - find it difficult to organise such
collective events. The jagran, which Tom and I were going to attend, was
being sponsored by a prominent politician - Chandraprakash - and not
entirely out of altruistic reasons. In hosting and sponsoring such
events, he meant to accrue political mileage by allowing for collective
cultural indulgence which are few and far between in the jhuggis. This
brief background is essential to understand what follows thereafter.

Even though the lane cutting into Bhumhiheen camp to approach the park
is not very narrow, the sea of humanity that had descended upon the
space made it feel just inches wide. Tom, tallish and white, stood out,
and as we were trying to hurdle our way through this densely packed
human layering, we encountered drunk young men, who were keen to mark
their territory by hurling obscenities and cackling at their
performance, especially when it evoked a reaction in the crowds, namely
the women. The women were trying to make their way in too, there were
young girls - either in groups or accompanied by an elder - equally keen
to indulge in the rare occasion of collective, cultural event. However,
the space, the experience and performances were essentially masculine in
nature.

Tom, who had arrived in Delhi for the first time only hours back, was
overwhelmed. And not surprisingly; I did not let it be known then, but
even I was. He insisted we go back, and we did. At the corner of the
intersection, we stood, his sense of unease apparent. I rolled a smoke,
whilst Tom regained his breath. We agreed to make our way back into the
park; in retrospect, I am not sure whether Tom remained overwhelmed, but
as soon as the tents acting as makeshift entrances into the park opened
up, he was at his sonic best: listening, recording, catching sounds as
they were hurling about. The expansiveness of the park, replete with all
the props for the theatrical night to follow - a stage, children, men
and women dressed in the attire of different gods and bright lighting -
was a relief; even to me.

And thus wetting his ears in this deep end Govindpuir jhuggis
soundscapes, we set out over the period of next three weeks to record
for the BBC radio documentary on Govindpuri Sounds.

The next three-weeks were a sonic indulgence at its loudest. Tom soon
acquired a fan-following among the residents of particularly Navjeevan
camp, especially the children. The association being immediately
established on account of the Tom-Jerry cartoon, and Tom was often
referred to as Tom Tom. During the three-weeks, we followed the lives of
women who had gone through difficult circumstances; we listened into
women filling water; we arrived early in the morning to listen into the
jhuggis wake up; we often stayed late nights.

It was an exhilarating experience for me; even though I realised how
demonic my laugh is when Tom would playback the day’s recording. This
was on several accounts. It was the first time that I sharing the ears,
so to say, with someone else such that we listened into similar notes
and modulations; this practice of collaborative, shared listening which
at once validated my own listening but also compelled me to tune into
someone else’s as well. Here, a point needs to be made. I did share
listenings with the residents of the jhuggis, especially the women. By
the time of recording the documentary, almost a decade and so after my
initial entries into Govindpuri, we had arrived at our own
‘collaborative’ practice of listening. By now, I was so tuned into
Govindpuri that I had almost instinctively learned how to ‘block’
certain sonic manifestations.

The manner in which the lived, almost everyday collaborative listening
with the residents of Govindpuri was different from the experiences of
sharing the ears, so to say, with Tom was on account of the fact that he
was as much an outsider as one can be. We had first met in the quietness
of Cambridge where we discussed listening, soundscapes and strange
fictions. For me, the collaborative listening with Tom then was a
validation of sorts of my own ‘ears’ in that sense. I had pursued my
doctoral research in another staid, quietness, that of Brisbane. Though
I did not live in Brisbane for prolonged durations whilst conducting the
research, I spent almost nine months at a stretch there to finish
writing my thesis. The exhausted silence of the city had a very
disquieting impact on me. Away from the multiplicities of sonic
manifestations of not only Govindpuri, but also the city of Delhi, I
would often find myself wondering and worrying whether what I was not
‘making up’ the listenings. This is not only a mere admission of
insecurity in oneself (though as a third-world academic one’s work is
rarely taken seriously if not validated by one or another ‘first world’
scholars), but is symptomatic of more structural and systemic concerns
of production of knowledge when it is relying on modes outside of the
established ‘verifiable, legible, visual’ practices.

The collaborative listening, which the recording towards the documentary
compelled, thus only lend to further tuning my ears into the
considerations of soundscapes as a valid social, cultural, political
artefact, particularly for those on the margins? As there are teaching
modules to acquaint those eager with nuances of visual cultures, could
there be a similar possibility with soundscapes or aural practices? In
what ways to think about listening not only as a matter of auditory
compulsion or even ‘engaged hearing’ but perhaps ‘privileged hearing’?
In what ways to understand, decode, call out these ‘privileges’? Can we
think about listening as a valid, without concerning ourselves with its
verifiability or not, methodological undertaking? In what ways then do
we refine that reckoning?

**Tripta Chandola (TC):** I listened into the everyday of the slums in Govindpuri.
Retrospectively, it is a tempting proposition to posit this ‘intent’ as
an intellectually driven project but the fact of the matter is that it
was an purely instinctive, responding to an impulse -political, poetic,
intellectual and theoretical - to distance myself from the manner in
which ‘slums’, its residents were framed in both academic and mainstream
discourse. I listened, not because I was either all too familiar with
the rich, interdisciplinary theoretical, intellectual contributions to
sensorial anthropology, sound studies or even the explosive potential,
possibilities which soundscapes allow to engage with the lives,
histories and testimonies especially of those on the margins, outside
the literate, hegemonic space.

**Tom Rice (TR):** Yes, I think this an interesting point about the listening being
instinctive. I had never been sure when reading your work why you
started listening to Govindpuri in the first place, but I think in the
end that probably the soundscape made an impression on you, and drew
attention to itself (there is a real sense on which sound has an agency
of its own in this respect, and theory from STS on non-human agency can
be applied to sound quite successfully I think). After the sound
environment has made itself noticed, the more intellectual attention, by
which I mean ‘deliberate thought about sound and reading relevant
literature from the social sciences’, perhaps began to take over in your
thought process. I remember you saying that you do not think of yourself
as a particularly auditory person, which is interesting. Clearly the
sounds of Govindpuri were rich, intriguing and powerful enough to make
you devote a very great deal of time and energy to their study (talk
about possessing agency!). I myself have always had an interest in
sound. I don’t know exactly where this came from, but by the time I went
to university I knew I wanted to work in radio and to document life and
explore ideas in a sonic medium. In the final year of a degree in Social
Anthropology I was given the opportunity to write a dissertation on a
subject entirely of my own choosing, I decided that I would write about
the radio station at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary (situated very close
to Edinburgh University and to the flat where I was living at the time).
I was working as a volunteer there in order to try to accumulate skills
and experience in radio with the aim of applying for a job in radio
later on. I was also working in student and community radio around then.
My initial intention for the dissertation had been to look at the way
the DJ’s on the hospital radio station used music and techniques of
speech to try to create a sense of unity among patients, a sort of
imagined community of people brought together temporarily in the
hospital because of ill health. One of my jobs at the station, which was
called Red Dot Radio, was to go around the wards and to gather music
requests from the patients which would be played on the evening’s
programme. However, many of the patients to whom I spoke drew attention
to the sonic environment of the ward and the generally negative ways in
which it affected them - preventing them from sleeping, waking them
early, provoking feelings of irritation, disgust, exposure,
embarrassment and so on. They used the hospital radio as a way of
temporarily escaping this unpleasant sound environment. I say
temporarily escaping because the fact that they were hospitalised meant
that they were unable to escape it fully until they were discharged.
They were to a large extent a captive audience, and had little real
choice but to exist within the hospital and its soundscape. It was only
really at this point, and through the instruction and direction of the
patients themselves, that I began to listen to the sound environment of
the hospital, noticing its qualities and being surprised by their
variety and intensity. This was the start of the project that began with
the dissertation and culminated in my monograph which you mention -
Hearing and the Hospital. But ever since that listening with patients I
have been drawn to researching sonically rich and intense environments.

**TC:** I listened, intently and attentively, first on the account that
I as an ethnographer had to ‘mute’ my own position-premised hearings
into the jhuggis. This ‘tuning of the ear’, so to say, opened up
journeys and experiences of the self and the space of jhuggis as I had
never heard in the academic, mainstream discourse, at least not so
loudly and definitely not so assertively. Of the aspirations, romances,
heartbreaks, deceit, negotiations, politics beyond the narratives of
‘lacks, deprivations, misery and marginality’. I was at once seduced and
humbled. And following from this, I listened, even more intently,
because it was this un-listened present, past and futures of and from
the jhuggis which I wanted to insist on.

**TR:** I think that one thing an ethnographic approach does, or rather,
one thing one is aiming to achieve using an ethnographic approach, is to
educate oneself as to the way in which others attach meaning or
importance to particular sounds in their day to day environment. One
then hopes to relay something of that way of listening - be it in a
written text, radio programme, audio essay - whatever the medium. It’s
not so much about muting one’s own hearings in my experience, but about
changing the way one hears and documenting that change. That was what
Govindpuri Sound was about I would say. Describing the sound environment
but also the way that people live in relation to it.

That expression ‘tuning the ear’ is interesting. One can certainly
become more knowledgeable skillful at listening to an environment. One
can notice sounds and qualities of sound one didn’t before, and one can
become better able to judge the kinds of feelings and associations a
sound might evoke in a listener or group of listeners. I guess it’s
important from my point of view not to think about ‘the ear’ in a
reductive way, but to recognise that ‘the ear’ also involves the
integrated brain/mind/body and is bound up with the position one
occupies in social and geographical space, with postures, technologies
(most obviously the microphone in *Govindpuri Sound*), attention, mood
and so on.

I certainly felt while we were making Govindpuri Sound, that, as you
say, what one heard was at odds with the mainstream academic and public
discourse surrounding the slums. Almost continually there were snatches
of romantically charged music drifting out of houses, and people
listening and singing along to these. When they saw us walking around
with a microphone many people were understandably curious. Often they
wanted to sing into the microphone and and be recorded, usually singing
romantic or wistful songs. As I say in the programme, people we met were
often more ready to sing than be interviewed. There could be interesting
political implications to this observation. There seemed to be a
convention that the microphone should elicit performance rather than
comment. Perhaps this would have applied less to people who understood
themselves to occupy a higher place in the social hierarchy and who
possessed different levels of education, confidence in the value of
their own opinions and so on, though I am speculating here. Negotiations
and arguments were also noticeable too: there was a lot of back and
forth, sometimes at high energy and volume levels, though didn’t
understand the subject matter here so can’t comment as to what it was
really about. I was quite surprised by how much laughter I heard, though
again, I’m can’t be sure I understood the subtleties of the spirit in
which people were laughing. I got the laughter, but I’m not certain I
got ‘the joke’.

I relate to what you are saying about aspects of the slum experience not
being listened to. Listening in this sense - as a kind of focused and
empathetic engagement - is very valuable where it has not been done
before and where it occupies a space that has been neglected by more
established modes and techniques of attention and attending.

**TC:** I listened because within this ontological engagement with the
residents of Govindpuri, I was able to present their lives, sense of
spaces, self, negotiations as articulated and claimed by themselves
within their own grammar and using their vocabularies. I was allowed
possibilities to engage with the everyday of the jhuggis
besides/alongside the logic or experiences of poverty, deprivation and
marginalities (even though not losing sight of it in a broader,
structural sense). The poverty, the deprivations, the limited
infrastructural availabilities were not a secret that had to be
unraveled. These are obscenely obvious, and from my political,
intellectual position, it was a bloody affrontation to the intelligence
of the residents to ask them to spell it out. And to overlook the need
to ‘verify’, ‘document’ and ‘validate’ these experiences of the
marginalities - the seduction of triangulation - which captures the
imagination of so many, especially when engaging with the lives of the
poor.

**TR:** Yes, I don’t disagree with anything you have said in the
paragraph above. It may not be appropriate for me to say this in this
piece, but I suppose I tend to encourage people to be realistic about
their claims. It’s not as if you spoke to all the slum residents (this
would be impracticable) and I don’t think you are claiming to represent
all of them. Rather during a very long period of being a researcher in
GP on a range of projects, establishing close and long-lasting
friendships with particular people there, and speaking to a great many
other slum residents over time in a wide variety of contexts, you have
developed a detailed and nuanced understanding of life in GP, one which
is not present in the impersonal and generalising discourses used by
researchers in Development and Urban Studies, for instance. I am just
riffing here...

**TC:** In thinking through this exchange, I read your book - *Hearing
and the Hospital* - again. I am not sure in what frame or from what
vantage point I was engaging with your research earlier, but in this
re-reading (whilst thinking about re-listening into Govindpuri), I can
draw very definite parallels to my own research.

The position of the patient in your research - particularly those in
post-operative and intensive care units - immobile and incapacitated to
give their testimonies of their state of well-being within a particular
knowledge praxis (here, medical sciences) nevertheless do not cease to
be, so to say, asserting themselves through their ‘sonic bodies’. And in
the attentive ‘sethoscopic listening’ - I will return to the this
conceptual framing, which in the moment I am absolutely titalted and
excited by - which these ‘sonic bodies’ demanded, you also
locate/identify significant developments in medical sciences,
technologies, modalities in making meaning itself.

**TR:** Yes, again I don’t disagree with anything you say in the
paragraph above. I guess I’m not sure how to relate it back to GP at
this point. I guess we need to remember too that the readers are
unlikely to have come across Hearing and the Hospital or to know what is
in it.

For me, the position of the patient and the residents of the jhuggis
share a certain incapacitated predicament. Is that too much of stretch?
In both instances, the ‘body’ in question lacks a definite agency to
penetrate the very hegemonic, discursive spaces and knowledge practices
which in return locates/ensures its ‘well being’: in the case of the
patients within the historiography of medical sciences itself and for
the residents of ‘slums’ within the legal, development, urban planning
discourse. However the ‘sethoscopic listening’ which extends
palpability, evidencing the living which merely the ‘seeing’ might miss,
to the patient in the case of the hospital, and listening as a
political, methodological tool in the case of Govindpuri which compels
engaging with the everyday beyond and besides the framing of ‘poverty,
etc’., is potent with the possibilities of accommodating, acknowledging
on their own accord the records, histories, experiences of those on the
‘margins’? Here, I am locating the patient’s body (and the agency she
can assert) within Sontag’s problematisation in Illness as Metaphor.

I think you have really got to the heart of why, for me, listening is
important as an ethnographic technique and also just as a way of being
in the world. It’s about ‘evidencing the living which merely the
“seeing” might miss’. It’s also about attending to something that is
widely dismissed as superficial and unimportant.

To continue that idea, a common attitude I encounter is: “why are you so
interested in sound when (in the hospital context) people are undergoing
serious operations/need to be protected from hospital acquired
infections/there is a funding crisis in the National Health Service”
etc. In GP it might be: “Why are you so interested in sound when there
are serious problems with things like access to water”. My response to
this is to feel: “Well, there is a lot going on in this soundscape that
evidences the things you are concerned about (for instance, exposure to
noise seems likely to affect patient sleep and rest and so to affect
recovery rates, which means longer patient stays in the hospital and
makes the hospital less financially efficient, and the busyness of the
soundscape reflects the complexity of the contact that is taking place
on the ward and so reflects the difficulty of controlling infection),
but there is also much going on acoustically in the ward to which you
are oblivious because you don’t perceive it (for instance the patients
reacting with disgust and embarrassment to their own and other peoples’
body sounds which are audible in the enclosed and densely occupied space
of the ward, and which have profound implications for the experience of
hospitalisation). In GP you could say, for instance, that the presence
of water sounds in the soundscape is reflective of water scarcity and
wider scarcity of vital resources, but that, as you suggest in your
research, you also miss the gossip, teasing, flirtation, abusing,
shaming etc that is going on if you don’t listen, and these kinds of
exchange are vital to the experiential fabric of life in GP.

**TC:** As a sound anthropologist, do you think that soundscapes \[as
social, material, cultural, political artifacts and listening - in
different ways - as a methodological praxis\] have this inherent
‘disruptive’ potential to disturb the hegemonic practices of knowledge
production? Have the possibilities been exhausted? What are the
possibilities - methodologically, intellectually, theoretically - of
exhausting these potentialities, if in fact these resound with it? Or am
I leaning towards romanticisation of positing visuality vis-a-vis
aurality as binaries?

**TR:** This is a huge question or set of questions and realistically I
probably can’t answer them at all fully. I think on the whole that
trying to set up visuality and aurality in a binary is unhelpful and
tends not to work. In real life situations where the senses can only be
decoupled in very temporary and somewhat artificial ways, and
technological is increasingly blurring the boundaries between what is
heard and what is visualised (see Ingold and also Sterne on these
issues). That said, I think it can be helpful to consciously place
emphasis on the aural and de-prioritise the visual at times in order to
pursue particular research aims, and that this act can be disruptive to
hegemonic practices of knowledge production. I don’t think listening is
‘inherently’ disruptive, but it can be used in disruptive ways. I do not
think we are even close to exhausting the disruptive possibilities of
listening as a way of producing knowledge, and actually I think that in
the social sciences we are only at the beginning of this journey. What
the possibilities are ‘methodologically, intellectually, theoretically -
of exhausting these potentialities’ is a big question and might need a
different article.

**TC:** In your conclusion, whilst taking the Perspective Tour of the
permanent collection at the Wellcome Museum in London, you make the
point to the attendee of ‘requiring imagination’ to attend to the
‘cacophony’ which would be at the heart of the ‘acoustic archaeology of
medicine’. In the similar vein, I would like to stretch this call for
‘imagination’ to engage with the sounds of the everyday of the jhuggis,
all relegated to all encompassing and overwhelming ‘noise’. However,
what would be the task - as anthropologist/ethnographers invested in
listening, in soundscapes - to enliven the imagination of those not so
‘sonically tuned’?.

**TR:** I suppose what’s needed here is a direct provocation to listen
to the jhuggis and their history (if one is taking an acoustic
archaeology approach). I remember when we were making GP sound you took
me to what is now a rather nice public park, a large green space near
Nehru place. You pointed out that this had once been a very large slum
settlement, set up by people who came to work on the buildings that
became Nehru place itself, and catering for the needs of all the
workers. Then, to cut a long story short, once the building project was
finished the slum was cleared and replaced with the park. I have good
audio of you, actually sounding quite emotional, as you explain that
there is no longer any trace of the slum and that no one in the years to
come will know that a slum ever existed there. You can hear the sense of
loss and anger in your voice about all the traces of human life that are
now gone. This would be a good point at which to provoke people to
reimagine what that place might have sounded like. You could even do an
installation in that park where you urge people to remember these people
whom you suggest public discourse does not regard as worth remembering.
Or you could gather interviews from people who lived there and then play
them to visitors to the park over headphones as part of a site specific
installation. That could be interesting and, as you suggest, enlivening
to the imagination.

I feel that one thing the hours of recording for GP sound we made might
do is represent an archive of what sounds could be heard in that
particular place at that particular time. This could be very valuable
for some GP residents if (and when?) the slum is removed and its
inhabitants are ever relocated. Or it could be useful as a sort of
public record or cultural resource. Then again, you have to wonder who
would want to take the time to listen - but there may well be people one
day who would have an interest. The recordings could be catalogued and
given to an institution like the British Library Sound Archive (though
there might well be an Indian equivalent).

I was speaking to someone
recently about the GP sound documentary, and he suggested that the
sounds could be edited into a package of ‘sounds from a Delhi slum’ and
that permission to use them could then be sold to people who might be
interested in making films, audio pieces, video games etc using them. It
raises questions as to who really owns these recordings (the people of
GP? You as the researcher? Me as the recordist? The production company?
The BBC as the commissioning body and funder of the recordings even
though not all of them were used in the programme? No one?). It might be
an interesting project to consult GP residents on this question and find
out what they feel as well as to ascertain the legal position. I doubt
the sale of permission to use these recordings would ever make serious
money, and it may not be worth the labour of editing the package
together, but the idea does raise interesting questions as to who should
have what rights over the soundscape and recordings of it.

##References
Rice, Tom. 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx.
The documentary was commissioned by BBC for its program The Documentary
and was aired on 2 February 2015. More information here: https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/34775/Tom%20Rice%20Govindpuri%20Sound%20REF%20document.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.

[^5_1]: Tom Rice is a Senior Lecturer (Anthropology) at the University of Exeter, http://socialsciences.exeter.ac.uk/sociology/staff/tomrice/. Tom Rice, 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx. The documentary was commissioned by BBC for its The Documentary program and was aired on 2 February 2015. More information here: https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/34775/Tom%20Rice%20Govindpuri%20Sound%20REF%20document.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.


# 6. I Wail, Therefore I Am

## The Wall

On 31 March 2008, 1,000 slum dwellings were razed to ground in the GP
slums in Kalkaji extension in South Delhi:

> Construction of a five-foot wall to divide a slum cluster from
> neighbouring middle-class colonies is wreaking havoc in south Delhi’s
> Kalkaji Extension \[...\] bulldozers razed down more than 1,000 small
> shops and homes to make way for a wall that will encircle all three
> camps in the slum cluster: Bhumiheen, Nehru and Navjeevan. Four
> hundred metres of the proposed 2-km wall are already in place, under
> construction by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) since December.
> “We are acting on an order from the High Court”, says DDA’s executive
> engineer K K Khanna. And the High Court was responding to a petition
> filed by Arsh Avtaar Singh, former president of Kohinoor Apartments
> Resident Welfare Association, in May 2005. The petition sought a
> solution against encroachment of roads and services by slum residents.
>
> Neighbouring middle-class colonies support Singh’s efforts. A
> flat-owner from nearby Konark Apartments, who does not want to be
> named, says: “All my life savings have been used to purchase this
> flat. For 22 years I have lived with the stink from open defecation,
> and constant over-crowding from blocked roads”.
>
> Residents want slum dwellers to be relocated in pukka housing. “I feel
> bad for them”, says Singh, whose own domestic help lives in Bhumiheen
> Camp. “They should be given an alternative home immediately”.
>
> But the DDA claims it needs time to relocate the slum dwellers. “The
> wall is a temporary arrangement to offer protection to flat owners”,
> Khanna says. In the interim, Daliwal, a resident of Konark apartment,
> thinks the wall should be built higher. “It should be at least eight
> foot high, and built either with bricks, or grills and mesh. There
> should also be fewer outlets”. The camp’s residents, though, are
> fuming. “We were given no warning”, says Sagar. She claims to have
> bought her grocery shop for Rs 20,000 rupees 13 years ago. “I make Rs
> 50 a day, through which I cook for my family. We have nothing to eat
> today without my shop”. Trying to salvage broken chairs and cutlery
> from his former confectionery store, Izhar Ali asks, “What should I do
> to earn? Can the government give me an alternative?”\[...\] DDA’s
> Khanna, meanwhile, insists there will be several entry and exit points
> in the wall. “There are more than 17 gaps in the 400-metre stretch
> built so far”, he says.
>
> DDA has a May 21 deadline for building the wall.[^6_1]

A notice of planned demolition was circulated amongst the residents of
GP camps through pamphlets and announcements in the last week of March
2008. The scheduled date for the demolition was 3rd April. When the
announcements were made, resident groups, political organizations, and
NGO’s convened to contemplate a course of action to impede the
demolitions. One of the resident groups in collaboration with a leading
NGO in the area filed a petition to demand a stay order for the proposed
demolitions. The hearing of this petition was scheduled for 2nd April.

On the evening of 30th March, the residents of GP slums began noticing
surmounting police presence in the area. When inquired about their
presence, the police personnel informed the residents of the demolition
scheduled for the next day. Early in the morning on 1st April, an area
of three kilometers around GP was cordoned off by police forces
including anti-riot squads. For the next few hours, the demolition squad
systematically razed the defined slums and shops to the ground.

However, unlike other demolitions, the primary agenda of demolitions
carried in GP slums was not to evict illegal squatters. As the local
press presents it, through this act of enclosure, the authorities
consider that they will be able to curtail the movements of the slum
residents on the roads, parks, and other spaces shared by the slums and
nearby middle class residents, providing respite to the latter.

The wall is justified by the state authority on the grounds that it will
protect the ‘flat owners’ (the middle-class population) in the area. By
implication suggesting that slum-dwellers pose a threat to this section
of society. The slums have co-existed with the middle-class settlements
in this area for over twenty years. There are no recorded incidents of
violent outbursts and attacks perpetrated by the slum-dwellers towards
the middle-class population, according to a search of police records and
media reports. Instead, the middle-class homes offer employment
opportunities to slum dwellers as domestic helps, cooks, guards, and
drivers.

Following the demolition and prior to the erection of the wall, I
conducted interviews with both slum-dwellers and residents of nearby
middle class settlements to understand the perception of ‘threat’ in the
everyday context.A significant proportion of the slum’s population work
in this way, and in discussions it became clear that they would be
unlikely to jeopardize their livelihoods by violence or any other form
of direct conflict with their employers and vice-versa. The latter
simply want to assert their claims and rights to not endure the assault
- smell, noise, dirt, filth - which the presence of the *jhuggis*
unleashes on them.

The demolitions at GP, the authorities later claimed, were peaceful. In
the present, the outlines of the wall are barely visible as it has been
innovatively woven into the architectural structures of the jhuggis. The
matter of whether the wall could or could not contain the slum-dwellers
for the safety of the middle-class neighbours of the apartments is not
of consequence, what matters is that the middle-class neighbour’s
claims, owing to their position on the social-cultural-political matrix,
of desiring sanitized spaces were acknowledged and legitimized by the
courts and other state authorities.

## The ‘Noisy’ Other

From where they are, what they hear of GP slums (hereafter, ‘GP’) is
only noise. In this reckoning, sounds in GP have no intent or
imagination; they emerge out of nowhere, conflate and contradict with
other sounds sharing the same predicament, to disappear into another
nowhere-ness. To these outside ears, the noisiness of GP has only the
singular and absolute purpose to invade and disrupt their deserved
silences.

That the heard noisiness of GP from the outside—namely, the middle-class
residents—is not a matter of decibel levels, but is a ‘particular trope
of experiencing sounds is significant in defining a ‘sense of the self,’
which is effectively employed to create social, moral, and political
exclusion[^6_2]’. In the liberties with listenings I evoke here, the
politics of production, performance, and articulation of ‘noise’ as a
specific instance of sonic engagement to highlight the broader processes
of othering in the city as a sonic premise to further complicate the
reckoning of noise—politically and philosophically—in itself. In that,
the listening attempt here aims to rehabilitate noise within the sonic
triad of ‘noise-sound- silence’, wherein sonicity linearly moves from a
state of chaos, through certain validations to an absolute state of
calm. I will tease out these negotiations by attempting the biography of
a sound—wailing—in the immediate context of GP, and then extrapolate it
onto the broader materiality of the sonic capacities available to others
in the city.

Slums are marginalized spaces in the materiality of a city. And in a
city like Delhi, with its hyperbolic transformative agendas to become a
‘world-class, clean and green city’, these spaces, more than ever,
represent the perversity of a past desired to be conveniently lost:
poverty, violence, unstructured growth, over-population, dirt, filth,
and noise[^6_3]. Acutely aware of the particular and predicament of the
sustained, strategic and everyday violence of the marginalization the
slums, and its residents, encounter, the space, its sociality, and
cultural politics have their own modalities to internalize this
violence; and in that process deliberately define the boundaries of
their own margins and locate their own others. One section of society in
GP on which this violence of othering and marginalization is inscribed
is its women. Gender, however, is not the sole category of othering, and
its associative social, cultural, and political disenfranchisement. The
considerations of caste, class, communal affiliation, and political
loyalties are equally determinant in these processes, however for the
sake of the listenings proposed here, it will be the voices — or lack
thereof — of the women in GP that will form the focus of our attention.

The soundscapes in the neighbourhood of Govinpuri, including the slums,
are dense and intense. It is indeed thick. To be heard here—literally,
metaphorically, and politically—necessitates employment of effective
sonic, technological, and social interventions. Given the space of GP is
highly gendered, the women are denied these techniques of being heard,
and thus their entry and assertion into its soundscapes often remain, at
best, muted. To then extend masculinity to GP’s soundscape as an over-
arching characteristic is not an attempt at simplification of its
listenings, but an invitation to hear into it from a gender-specific
trope. One sound—more accurately an instance of sonic performance by
women in GP—however, has the potential to disrupt the intersecting
sonic, spatial, and gendered masculine hierarchies, however temporarily:
it is that of a wailing woman.

An emaciated, sickly woman is sought, and quickly found. It is an early,
cold, January morning in 2012. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi
elections are a few weeks away. I am accompanying, listening to, and
interviewing a group of women mobilized from the three camps in support
of a local candidate contesting the elections. On the said day, there is
a scheduled rally in support of the candidate. The atmosphere in the
room where the women congregate is tense, only easing when the
required—emaciated, sickly—woman is identified. Preparations are in
order—often hasty, tense, and leading to heated exchanges. I am told
these are for the rally due in a few hours, but the specifics of the
plan are not discussed and there is no room for interrogation of that
sort. The emaciated, sickly woman is the hero of the moment;
deliberations about her attire, where to get the desired at such a short
notice, and assuring, and hushed consultations with her are taking place
in a corner. I continue to listen. Eventually we set out.

The stage for this setting is an intersection leading from the camps to
the main road. The intent by now is obvious; the group of women intends
to block this intersection so that the visit of the opposing candidate
into the camps can be stalled. The execution of the intent— the plan,
now in motion—is not without its ingenuity and strategic planning. The
emaciated, sickly woman, dressed in white, is laid down in the middle of
the road on a bamboo plaque usually reserved to carry the dead to the
cremation ground. She is covered with a white sheet with her face
partially covered. It is evident by now that the role assigned to the
emaciated, sickly woman in this planning is to play dead. And she does
it quite convincingly. The women congregate around her in semi-circle,
completely blocking the intersection. The imminent arrival of the
opposing candidate is anticipated, and the women surrounding the un-dead
dead woman start wailing in a collective, synchronized and sincere
manner. It is not a cry, it is not a shriek, it is simply a ‘prolonged
high-pitched cry of pain, grief, or anger’; it is indeed an inarticulate
‘high-pitched sound’. And, this sonic intervention has its desired
effect. The candidate from the opposing party, and his cohorts, try to
circumvent this sonic blockade, so to speak: they try to initiate a
conversation with the group of wailing women; they try to placate them;
they extend promises of justice delivered—without really knowing what
the act of criminality or the grievance is being mourned over. The
women, however, refuse to relent, and continue with the wailing. The
threat of seeking police intervention to remove this sonic blockade was
unimaginable: an assault on a group of wailing women, apparently
mourning the death of one of them, would have ruined any moral
respectability for the concerned candidate in the community.

Eventually, the opposing candidate leaves without holding the scheduled
rally, and the women disperse as effectively as they had claimed the
space, sonically. The undead finally awakens, walks alongside the others
to the murmurs of applause and admiration, though not without a hint of
envy. She—the emaciated, sickly woman—is after all the silent punctum of
the incisive and effective sonic intervention: wailing.

If sound in its singular manifestation is to be reckoned as a particular
and peculiar intersection of its spatiality and temporality in the site
of its origin, then soundscapes are the simultaneity of these
intersections. A spatial-temporal matrix can contain more than one
sound, thus complicating not only the Cartesian notionalities of space
and time, but also of the sonicities it contains. Thus, a sound is not
just a moment of insular and individuated instance of utterance, but
derives its momentum from the collusions with the multiplicities that
abound these matrices: spatial, temporal, sonic, social, cultural, and
political. A listener, not unlike a cartographer, traverses through
these matrices to ‘make sense’, to hear, to map not by accompanying each
sound (or in the case of a cartographer, venturing into every crevice)
but by deliberately, unintentionally, and inadvertently leaving most
un-listened into. And thus the ears, as appendages which can never be
‘closed’, become the libraries where these listening intos are
archived.[^6_4]

But unlike a library, and an archive, with its robust physicality and
Deweyian, almost clinical sensibilities, an ‘ear’ remains a highly
individuated, and thus an ambiguous site of production of knowledge.
Lending anxiety to this ambiguity and identification of ‘listening(s)’
as a knowledge base is not only the technical matter of ears that cannot
be closed, but also sounds that cannot be contained. And thus the
individuated hearings are not so much a matter of the ears as itself,
but a more insidious and astute question of ‘but whose ears?’. The
strategic, systematic, and deliberate privileging of hearings of, and
by, certain ears— with political, social, cultural, and moral
currencies—then assumes the role of listeners selectively identifying
sounds to situate it within the sonic triad of ‘noise-sound-silence’.
These listening(s) of course do not (and cannot) contain sounds
permeating into ears and spaces; instead, they weave sounds together
into logic of those that are contaminated, the ones that are sanctioned
and others that are sanctified thus deliberating, and setting limits, to
the permissible spatial-temporal-sonic intersections in a space, moment,
and its memory. The ears that dare to hear otherwise, and the spaces
where sounds, which disrupt the precariously listened-into
spatial-temporal sonicity, abound are either silenced, deliberately un-
listened into or identified as sites of sonic contamination.

It is within this schematic that the outside listening into of GP is
collapsed into a cacophony of contaminated sounds collectively
identified as noise. This reckoning has implication both in the real and
rarefied imagination of the slums and its residents—the ears and the
space: they exist in a perpetual state of chaos, lacking potential and
imagination to move towards a validated, and eventually, a state of
calm; the chaotic predicament is not conducive to conversations; thus
they deserve un-listening and deliberate silencing; they are deemed
unfit to participate into the listenings of and in the city; they are
all but noise, a distraction; this chaos emerges not out of structural,
social, and political marginalization of these ears and spaces, but from
its inherent moral and ethical corruptibility; they are beyond
redemption, and thus, not unlike an erring child punished to stand out
of the classroom, they are denied recognition as citizens of the state.

The slums and its residents therefore perpetually reside in the twilight
zone of being un- citizens, loud-uncouth-noisy.

But. However. Nevertheless: the city passes. Listen. The city passes.
Lend your ears to the sound that refuses to die, dissolve and indeed
disrupts; let us then revisit the sound which got us here in the first
place: the women wailing an undead-dead, an existent non-existent.
Wailing is a sound that, in its singular utterances, colonizes the
spectrum of the triad ‘noise- sound-silence’ triad in its entirety, and
thus its highly disruptive potentialities.[^6_5]

Crying and shouting as distant cousins of this sonic performance are not
without this disruptive potential, however, these acts inherently extend
an invitation for a negotiation: either a complicity in the act,
situation, or moment responded to by crying or shouting; or, a desire to
seek redemption and retribution, and often even an acknowledgement of
guilt and penance. Wailing is a non-negotiable sonic performance.
Seemingly inarticulate in its “prolonged high-pitched cry of pain,
grief, or anger” or just as a ‘high-pitched sound’, it is in fact
unapologetic, resilient, and assured. In its so-heard incoherence, it
carries the currency of being a contaminated sound, noise; in its
effectiveness to demand attention of the ears, it is a validation of an
emotion intensely felt, a sound; and, in its transcendental potential to
silence by demanding complete hearing, it also manifests the calmness of
silence. In that: wailing comes to haunt the hearings, it disrupts the
spatial-temporal-sonic matrices as in its sonic performance its potency
to contain “noise-sound-silence” all at once. Women as systematically
muted agents—historically, politically, and sonically—performing the
wailing further lends to the anxiety: if the silenced finally start
speaking in tongues that cannot be contained and demand complete
reverence, one only wonders the wrathful gods they will evoke. The
imagery of a group of women in GP wailing onto the body of an
undead-dead uncannily evokes the predicament of the slums in the city,
here in the city of Delhi.

Superimposing the masculine/feminine binary to the cartographic reality
and imagination of the spaces in the city, slums most definitely embody
the *feminine*, and the sustained, systematic, and everyday violence
that it entails. Here, the intent of evoking the binary of masculine/
feminine to situate the real, imagined, and desired engagements between
the slums and the city is to complicate these reckonings instead of
reinforcing them[^6_6]. In their encounters with the city in different
capacities—for example, as employees, voyeurs, and consumers—the men
from the GP feel emasculated, especially in their interactions with
middle- class women as employers and objects of desire. In these
encounters, it is required of them to perform *femininity*, exaggerated
by the *silence* they have to maintain. This silencing is instituted by
the expectation of non-negotiable subservience in the case of former,
and its almost-negligible possibility of actualization in the latter.
These displaced (never disrupted though) masculinities, however, are
rehabilitated by its exaggerated, perverse hyperbolic performance within
GP’s spatiality and sociality where their position, especially vis-à-vis
women, is one of dominance. However this performance, with all its
violence, does not dissipate uncontested, remaining an exclusive domain
of the men. Women, both as individuals and occasionally, as a
collective, challenge it, whilst others (who either by the virtue of
their social position—mother-in-law, for instance—or by enjoying a
certain political legitimacy) not only embrace and internalize its
vocabulary but execute its violence on other women and weaker men. The
identified *feminine*, not necessarily a biological entity contained
within gendered qualifications, continues to be a site (both in its
pathological situation of a space and a body) where the perverse desire
to discipline, destabilize, and de- stroy can be melodramatically
performed. The anticipation lending tension to the punctum moment
accruing the *masculine-feminine* dramatics (in either its rendition of
space or body) is not a resigned deliberation of the sustenance of the
status quo, but the palpable *dread* of a conversation.

The deliberate compulsion to collapse all and every sound of the slums
in its hearing by the dominant ears—namely, the middle classes—as
contaminated and relevant only in its noisy manifestation is merely an
attempt to deny the potential of mutable sonicities. And thus to keep
the slums suspended in perpetuity as un-heard, silenced, un-dead, and
un- existent in the circus that makes the city.

However. Nevertheless: *the un-heard do wail; the un-dead do not just
cremate themselves into ashes; and the un-existent continue to move
across the spatial-temporal-sonic matrices.* In their wailing, they
haunt.[^6_7]

## Postscript
Saroj, the protagonist of the essay *The Subaltern as a Political
Voyeur*, the organic intellectual, was the undead, the hero of the hour.
She set her eyes on me as she woke up, commanding a smoke. As we walked
into the lanes, she inquired, ‘white does not really suit me, does it?’.
I wanted to but hesitated in saying it aloud, ‘neither does being dead’.

##References
Butler, Judith. *Gender Trouble,* London: Routledge, 1990 (1999), p.
vii.

Douglas, Mary. 'The Social Control of Cognition: Some Factors in Joke
Perception', *Man*, 3.3 (1968): 361–376.

Jha, Preeti.‘Great Wall of Kalkaji’, *Indian Express,* 5 April 2008.

Zizek, Slavoj. *Organs without Bodies: On Deleuze and Consequences,*
London: Routledge, 2004 (2012).

[^6_1]: Preeti Jha, ‘Great Wall of Kalkaji’, *Indian Express,* 5 April 2008.

[^6_2]: I have unpacked the tensions of social and morally determined listening into the slums in Tripta Chandola, ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review* 34.4 (2012): 391–408 and in my doctoral research. Here, I establish the manner in which this listening not only affects the everyday interactions between the residents of the slums and their middle-class neighbours, but also the manner in which it frames the slum-dwellers as others within the imagination of the city, and its impact on urban policies that strategically exclude the spaces of slums and its residents.

[^6_3]: In the Indian context, these constructions have a historical, social, and cultural continuity, deeply embedded as they are in the practice of caste discrimination, which are essentially sensorially ordained. However, the evocation of these categories to justify the transformations of the Delhi into a world-class, global city attempts to neutralize these negotiations by rendering onto them an ahistorical, modernist agenda. This Iidentify as ‘sensorial re-turn in urban planning policies’ which I argue is, ‘\[...\]continuation of the elitist agenda to contain bodies and conquer spaces. However, the manner in which it is being executed is outside the praxis of caste, class and religion in the name of progress and development, thereby lending it a secular character, which denies it historical continuity and complexity. The sensorial re-turn is acquiring not only a political rhetoric and mainstream support, but also legal sanction’.

[^6_4]: Aside: is there a technical, clinical and, even perhaps, a cynical term for storing and sorting listening without reliance on a visual paradigm? Its reliance on a doctrine visually inclined? But then Borges was blind after all? The insertion of a blind Borges (a story-teller par excellence, but most fundamentally a custodian of knowledge in his avatar as a librarian) is to at once reveal the visual-centric bias in acknowledging and classifying experiences as knowledge cultures and practices and to emphasise that there are indeed other modalities of experiencing—evolving a ‘sense of self’—arrived at through a melee of sensorial explorations. Alberto Manguel who in his youth read to Borges when he started losing his sight, renders the experience of *experiencing* libraries, stories, and their classification with Borges as ‘memories of memories’, inadvertently displacing the visual bias in *With Borges*. The Western, Cartesian, colonial agenda of the visual bias was not without its deliberation to deny of a ‘sense of self’(by disregarding the knowledge cultures premised on a sensorial reckoning) of the encountered others—the natives. The ‘sensorial re-turn’ is but a particular and peculiar manifestation of this kind of othering.

[^6_5]: Here, the disruptive potential of wailing as a sonic performance by women in GP is identified as ‘\[...\] a scandal with the sudden intrusion, the unanticipated agency, of a female ‘object’ who inexplicably returns the glance, reverses the gaze, and contests the place and authority of the masculine position. The radical dependency of the masculine subject on the female ‘Other’ suddenly exposes his autonomy as illusory’. See Judith Butler, *Gender Trouble,* London: Routledge, 1990 (1999), pp vii. This performance further displaces the male gaze (and hearing) which Zizek identifies as ‘[...] endeavors to counter the fundamental hystericity (lie, lack of a firm position of enunciation) of the feminine speech’ by laying claims to the very vocabularies which are reckoned to render them incomprehensible, thus divesting the male gaze (and its hearings) of its autonomy. See Slavoj Zizek, *Organs without Bodies: On Deleuze and Consequences,* London: Routledge, 2004 (2012).

[^6_6]: The reactions in the Indian media and the middle-class rhetoric to the brutal Delhi Gang Rape case of 2012 are symptomatic of these negotiations. The fact that the perpetrators were residents of a slum settlement in the city distracted attention from the fundamental violence and brutality of the act of rape to the specific case being evoked as particular pathology of slumming. The materiality of this space was identified by most commentators as a breeding ground for rape. It is overpopulated; the people uneducated, and by that stretch uncouth; people here do not experience sex as a personal, emotional act, but perform it publicly; men are drunk and women lack morals. And, of course, these spaces are swarmed with those alien things: the migrants. The media was replete with such elaborations, with Sheila Dixit, the Chief Minister of Delhi then, even managing to push her deca- de long agenda of restricting the entry of migrants in the city in the kitty. See also: http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2013/s3683181. htm; http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/07/gang-rape-fear-anger-delhi-slums

[^6_7]: The potential of wailing — as a particular sonic performance and as a more generic manifestation of the gendered, spatial and social negotiations — is identified within its capacities to occupy/claim the position of *trickster*, ‘dispelling the belief that any given social order is absolute and objective,’, who demands an audience, critical and engaged, instead of silencing this performance, potent with possibilities, by a silent reception. See Mary Douglas, 'The Social Control of Cognition: Some Factors in Joke Perception', *Man*, 3.3 (1968): 361–376.


# 7. Sonic Selfies: Equalizing the Encounter with the Other 

In conversation with Jodi Dean (JD) and Geert Lovink (GL).[^7_1]

**GL:** **For many cultural critics, the selfie is a symbol for
neo-liberal self-promotion. There is a constant pressure to perform, to
show-off, be present. The selfie embodies the desperate attempt by the
‘failed individual’ to show that she (or he) still in the rat race: I am
alive, don’t forget me, look at me and think of me, next time you can do
me a favour \[…\] But first, how do we deal with the selfie phenomena
beyond forced participation or moral accusation, and develop ways of
seeing that integrate machine readable interpretations?**

It is a winter afternoon in the jhuggis. Whilst Delhi summers evoke
kindness of a very particular kind, the winters bring a peculiar
conviviality. And thus in one of the lanes of one of the camps, where I
am also present, just hanging about, this conviviality is performed in
all its loudness. However, there is a moment of rupture in the din of
conversations, casual banters, conflicting musical performances, an old
woman with frizzled hair rather casually lifts her arse, in full sight,
and let out a garrulous fart, brrrraaaaaaaaaaaaaar. A moment’s silence
followed with an equally loud collective laugh, but it was not to
embarrass or make the old woman conscious. She shifted her arse back to
the comfortable position, taking her time.

Retrospectively, I think that was the moment when I started thinking of
sonic performances as particular ‘individuated moments’ of establishing
and extending one’s sense of self and space. This was much before the
‘selfie’ days, Smartphones had not yet invaded the everyday life. From
my middle-class location, this public performance of a very ‘private’
sonic moment (which I distinctly remember being taught to curb,
especially in public), I was intrigued. The slums are highly gendered
space, and especially women’s mobility and performative potentialities
in every regards comes under intense scrutiny. However, the old woman on
account of her age had accrued permissions which are otherwise limited
to the young women, and thus the permission without the embarrassment. A
transgressive space is thus claimed and created.

I retrospectively attribute ‘sonic Selfies’ as a framework to locate the
individuated moments of sonic performances, particularly of the
identified Others, which when located within listening as a
methodological and political intervention exposes the potential to
displace, disturb and disrupt the ‘encounter’ in the Althusserian
sense.[^7_2] And thus from my almost two decades of listening into the
slums of Govindpuri, I highlight other encounters which the sonic
selfies necessitated, which I later extrapolate to macro-level
encounters from the everydayness of the jhuggis. The insistence on
recounting the sonic selfie encounters with the slums is to disrupt the
imagination of the slums, or perhaps any people, spaces and ideas on the
margins, as homogenised, flattened existences.

A young girl, not a day more than 15, from a conservative family, who
insist on ‘controlling’ her mobilities and bodily spatialities and
performances. She practices the ultimate defiance by insisting on
adorning a pair of jeans, a forbidden epitome of ‘modern’ ways reckoned
unbecoming by her family. She is beaten, abused, threatened with dire
consequences by her mother and brother, but she asserts her ‘sonic
selfie’ by a stoic muted, silent response. She does not retort. When
hit, she does not even cry, even though the tears streaming down her
face evidence to the momentum of the movement of the hand that landed on
her frail cheeks. But neither her silence or the jeans she is wearing
can be taken away from her. After a while, the family members relent.
And in the days, months, years, as I saw that young girl accumulating
years, her styling of her jeans just got better.

I can go on to list such moments in some length, but those are replete
in the other essays in the book. I want to return to GL’s evocation of
the ‘moral accusation’ and ‘failed individual’ which the creation and
circulation of ‘sonic selfies’ via mediated technologies, smartphones to
be precise, brought on to the residents of the slums as a constitutive
representative others in the broader urban imagination.

Sonic selfies as a moment of individuated performative sonic selves and
claiming of spaces by the others, here the residents of the jhuggis,
induce anxiety, particularly when performed in the shared public spaces,
which within the hegemonic imagination needs to absented of the
presences of these others. When the ‘sonic selfies’ were merely limited
to bodily presences and performances, there were adequate strategies
of silencing, disciplining and absenting these performances from these
hegemonic spaces.[^7_3]

The mediated sonic selfies, particularly the extensive usage of the
smartphones to listen to music, have ‘loud’ conversations over the phone
in public spaces - malls, metro, amongst others, and the performative
presence of the others of using the ‘same’ kind of technology, namely
the Smartphones, exacerbated newer forms of ‘anxiety of proximity’ with
the others. Unlike the ‘second visuality’ of selfie communism which
images produce, as JD insists, these mediated ‘sonic selfies’ are not as
easily to be ignored, absented and silenced.

Before proceeding with the transgressive capacities of the ‘sonic
selfies’, a pause is in askance to locate these tendencies in the
broader context of the bureaucratic-technocratic imaginations of
locating the other.

In 2013, the Government of India released a report, ‘Housing Stock,
Amenities & Assets in Slums—Census 2011'.[^7_4] In this report, along with
the access to potable water and sanitation facilities to the slum
dwellers, it accounts the ‘number of households availing banking
services and number of households having each of the specified assets’.
These assets include, amongst others, mobile phones. I wrote an
article responding to the media coverage, particularly focussing on
the usage of mobile phones in the slums.[^7_5] The manner in which articles in
mainstream media articulated these data sets is quite revealing of the
popular perceptions of ‘slumming’ in the cities. They were nothing short
of being virulent. Consider these: ‘Amenities in slums match up to urban
homes \[…\] India’s first-ever census of household amenities and assets in
slums has revealed that slum dwellers are also spending more on TV sets,
computers and mobile phones rather than sanitation’[^7_6] in one, and the
following in another: ‘34 per cent in slums have no toilet, but 63 per
cent own mobile phone \[…\] Depending on how one looks at it, “slumming
it” may just have acquired a whole new meaning — either most Indian towns
live the life of slums or the quality of life in slums is
improving’.[^7_7]

In both these articulations the tension to reckon the slum dwellers as
‘consumers’ is contemptuously palpable. The first blatantly overlooks
the structural factors leading to the systematic lack of sanitation
facilities in slums, which in fact is a state responsibility, by
shifting the onus on to the slum dwellers for not tackling these issues;
it is also clearly disapproving of the fact that the slum dwellers spend
more assets clearly meant for ‘entertainment’ than investing in
‘improving’ their everyday conditions. The second articulation, more
subtle in its tonality, at the outset sets out the anxiety of sharing
the same ‘consumerist-cultural’ space with the slums.

I juxtapose these reckoning with my experience and involvement from the
early 2000’s in the Open Source Movement in India and ICT4D project, the
heydays of the obscene celebration of new media technologies with
perverse potentials. Interestingly, in those days my issues (and
eventual departure) with the ICT4D movements and projects was not a
response far from my more recent articulation. Then, it was reckoned,
and I loosely articulate my own perspective on these initiatives, ‘seek
out the poor, marginalised people and spaces, equip them with one or the
other fancy new media technologies - computers, phones and such - and
teach them life skills, and lo behold, their lives will improve’. In
both these reckoning of the ‘poor’ - the eternal other - are denied any
foundational sense of ‘self’ wherein they can make ‘informed’ choices,
whether it be about what life skills and technologies might be most
useful or in their capacities as ‘consumers’ who in fact make an
informed choice about spending their own money on technologies,
particularly smartphones, just to have *fun*.

The issue I had with such a reckoning that the sole and singular mandate
of these initiatives leaned towards a ‘utilitarian’ use of the new media
technologies for the poor and thus further ‘rendering technical’ the
terms of these engagements, such that, ‘\[f\]irst, they reposed
political-economic causes of poverty and injustice in terms of amenable
to a technical solution. Second, they highlighted only those problems
for which a technical solution in fact be proposed'.[^7_8] These
initiatives were beyond the concerns of the fact these were a strategic
way for the State to absolve of its own responsibilities by outsourcing
them to these funding organisations and, more importantly, these were
insidious ways for the capitalist agendas (which usually also
inadvertently served the purposes of the funding organisations) to enter
into erstwhile unidentified, untapped markets and to impose a certain
form of governmentality.[^7_9]

In the aforementioned article, I argued, and I quote at some length for
its set the backdrop to ‘develop ways of listening’ into the ‘sonic
selfie’ phenomena.

> Official records as the ‘Housing Stock, Amenities & Assets in
> Slums—Census 2011’ (GOI 2013) are testimonies of, and by, the State to
> report on the ‘reality’—the transformations and progress; often
> reckoned as staid these testimonies, in fact, are ways in which the
> State not only ‘reflects on the real’, but also strategically sustains
> the idea of ‘the real’ it wants to purports. Considered on its own the
> report in question projects a ‘reality’ of the slums that is totally
> divorced from the ‘real, everyday’ experience of slumming. The media
> response to the Census 2011 report then can be identified by the State
> to mask its inadequacies (lack of inclination), as well as justifying
> the market-logic of development, by insisting on the ‘increased
> purchasing’ power of the slum-dwellers. In celebrating the dense
> penetration of mobiles the analyses fails to take into cognizance that
> for the first decade following the opening of the economy
> (1991)[^7_10] and the subsequent telecom policies (1994[^7_11],
> 1999[^7_12]), slums and other marginalized spaces, were not part
> of the network and remained ‘disconnected’. These were essentially
> meant to cater to an urban, middle-class population. Indeed the
> penetration of mobile networks in the slums (facilitated by cheap
> hardware and competitive call rates) have introduced ‘new’ cultures
> and practices of communicating, but these are not dramatic ruptures
> and, in fact, in most instances either a continuation and convergence
> of existing practices, replete with their social and cultural
> discrimination, prejudices, politics of control and access. While it
> is of significance to highlight how the everyday of the residents in
> marginalized spaces is transformed by the use of mobile phones, these
> practices ought to be situated within the backdrop of whether these
> technologies allow for residents of these spaces to become ‘empowered,
> engaged’ citizens with capabilities and capacities to make informed
> choices about participating in the democratic processes. Mobile
> penetration and its cultures of consumption in marginalized spaces is
> affected by the market forces or government and non-government
> interventions to ‘incorporate’ the residents of the slums as
> ‘citizens’ by illicit participation in initiatives designed to exhibit
> ‘model citizenship’ patterns; any digression from these narratives
> causes anxiety, as is evident from the media reportage to the Census
> 2011 report.

The anxiety-inducing tendency has to be located in the broader context
of the position of the others - in their corporeal presences but also in
imaginative potentialities. But when the other announces herself in
fully glory, the summer causally swaging in her hips, singing a song she
desires - however out of tune and unharmonious - walks the same paths as
the hegemonic self, the latter quite literally loses the plot. And sets
about to imagine other ways to summon, discipline the other.

I thus propose ‘sonic selfies’ as a conceptual framework, in all its
loudness and corporeality, as moment of displacing, disturbing and
rupturing the aspirations and imaginations of the tapestry of the
hegemonic self whilst also dislocating the sites where power, control
and violence could be exerted. In that, the ‘sonic selfies’ compel an
equalising moment, however momentarily, in the encounter with the other.
I also remain astutely and cynically aware, and thus do not overemphasis
on these practices to compel structural changes, set in motion a
revolutionary momentum, and I am not averse to admitting that these
‘equalising moments of encounter’ might only be compelled by matters of
compulsions. However, the encounters with the Other does not need to be
predicated on the premise of ‘love thy neighbour’ but a mutual, mutable
respectability to not silence them. The ‘sonic selfies’ have compelled
such an encounter wherein the Other cannot be muted, and the hegemonic
self has to listen, however grudgingly. Because, the ears, they never
close and thus insisting on a collective listening project of the selves
of the others.

**GL: The object watches us: the selfie is watching back \[…\] Selfies
can be read as proofs of utter presence, not as evidence of electronic
solitude, let alone a symptom of a personality disorder; they do not
exemplify who we are but show that we exist, at this very moment.**

**JD: We should take this point to its logical extreme, selfies are a
communist form of expression, social products appropriated by
capitalism, now of course the critical reflex is to dismiss selfies as
yet another indication of a pervasive culture of narcissism, I disagree.
The narcissism, the narcissism critique approaches the selfie as if it
were analysing a single photograph, it views the person in that
photograph as the photograph subject. Selfies though should be
understood as a common form emerging out of the communicative practices
of secondary visuality. Understood from within this practices, the
selfie has a collective subject, the many participating in the common
practice, the many imitating each other, the figure in the photo is
incidental. So, a selfie is a photo when makes of oneself using a mobile
phone in order to share the photo on social media, it exists digitally
in that weird in between of instant and forever, it’s not meant as a
commemoration, it doesn't memorialize what we’ve done, it's a quick
registration of what we're doing.**

A confession is in order: compared to most, I am a novice when it comes
to the use of Smartphones. I only acquired one, and that too as a gift
from a friend, in 2017. Until then, I carried a Nokia 1100, which cost
as much, and had none of the ‘smart’ capacities. I carried the phone
‘un-smart’ phone, almost as a chip on my shoulder, an announcement of a
counter-cultural statement: I refuse to participate in the obscene,
perversity of over-connectedness, indulgence in the ‘self’, and
resigning myself to the diktats of the market. I would often remark, and
not without a certain self-congratulatory moralising, partronizing tone,
that integral to the identities of the young girls, with whom I shared
momentary space whilst traveling in the ladies compartment of the Delhi
metro, are the three *S’s: Skinny jeans, Smartphones and Selfies.* I was
both intrigued and exasperated with this project of having ‘oneself
stare back at itself’. I am the child of socialist India, where
acquiring a landline was a bureaucratic battle, and its usage permitted
none of the immediacy, intimacy, privacy and unimaginable connectedness
(or perhaps dis-connectedness of connections) which the smartphones
allow.

The pervasive takeover by the Smartphones in Govindpuri also amused me,
though perhaps I was gentler in my critique. But, there was one. I
remember returning from Australia in early 2015, and as had become the
habit over the years, one of my first visits would be to the jhuggis,
carrying gifts and presents not from some distant lands, but often the
‘non-place’ sites of the duty free shops. Amidst the catching up, the
food, celebrations, I found the ‘gang of girls’ - all in early 20s, more
or less - with whom I shared more personal and intimate relationships,
huddled and having hushed conversations in the corner. I interrupted and
inquired whether another of their assignations was being plotted, and
feigned irritation at being left out. Seethu, whom I had first seen as a
young, confident teenager, had by now acquired a job in a fashion
merchandising firm and who regaled all by her ‘out-worldly’ adventures,
said, ‘well, Didi, no, no, there is nothing we are planning of that
sort, and if we were, we would need you. But this is something
different, I hope you don’t take it any other way, but we were planning
to pool in money to buy you a proper phone. We think you might be having
some money issues’. I was tad bit amused, but mostly flattered by their
attention. I told them, I was perfectly happy with my non-smart phone, I
had no use for it. I used the phone for what it is meant to do, and not
everything else. These ‘smartphone’ toys were for the young ones.

And over the years, I was fascinated by the increasing use of the
Smartphones (hereafter, SPs) in the jhuggis, particularly the young
girls. I was not engaged so much in their agendas and projects of
‘presenting and performing’ themselves, but identified the usage of
smartphones as emerging sites of 'feminine' assertions – in terms of
romances, venturing into external networks, etc. – especially as cyber
cafes, when they were really prevalent and popular were essentially
masculine spaces. And, secondly, the manner in which the inherent
capabilities of the smartphones was allowing to circumvent the text
based, literate modality of engagement which the non-smart phones did
not allow.

On every visit to GP, I found myself more and more intricately seduced
into this world of non-text, verbal, visual mode of ways of being,
making meaning the residents of the slums, particularly women, were
venturing into. What was most fascinating for me was the manner in which
a certain kind of de-colonization of the erstwhile otherwise
reckoned-democratic, but still elitist, space of the Internet was being
achieved by the constant and consistent presence the others were etching
onto it. Through the various social media platforms, these others - the
mostly illiterate, lacking technical skills and technological tools,
residents of GP - were inserting their ‘footprints’, so to say, on this
uncharted territory to become producers in their own right, instead of
merely consumers. These others silenced and absented in this space were
making their noises, without inhibitions and much aplomb, and like how!

One particular aspect of the claiming of these uncharted territories,
modes and modalities of being, performances was the use of WhatsApp
voice messaging feature in the smartphones which caught my imagination
and intrigue. Within the scope of the retrospectively attributed framing
of ‘sonic selfies’ whose canvas, so to say, is much broader, here I want
to insist on the practices of using this particular feature to respond,
and perhaps even modestly further the disruptive potential of ‘selfies’
as ‘communist form of expression’ and ‘as proofs of utter
presence’.[^7_13]

I also draw on my experience of producing, creating and consuming ‘sonic
selfies’ - via the WhatsApp voice feature - which has exploded my
relationship with the ‘field’, already firm and solid, into a sonic
constellation of a kind of commoning which could not be performed
earlier. And it is in this capacity of commoning is that I locate the
possibilities of ‘communist form of expression’ to be sophisticated.
Most of my closest and oldest associates here have never received formal
education and autodidacts in their own rights; in fact, it is to these I
owe the hacks into a lot of applications and their potential to which I
remained blissfully unaware. Until I was not available on the WhatsApp,
the communications had to have a certain preparedness: what time, missed
calls, low credit balance and other such considerations. The WhatsApp
voice feature, a gesture which in its physicality requires a flattening,
has disrupted, displaced and ruptured the matrix of the
spatial-temporality-physicality of our encounters. And I insist on this
particular feature of the WhatsApp to emphasise on ‘sonic selfies’
because in my encounters with my middle-class, educated, mostly
upper-caste, rarely Muslim collegiate (a slice of the hegemonic self,
perhaps) via WhatsApp, this feature is rarely, if never, used. Our
exchanges are text-based and visually orientated.


And thus: a young woman, with no formal education, ensues a romantic
liaison with a man - who knows of what age - whom she met surfing one of
the social media platforms by sending him voice messages. Sometimes he
would send text, which she would rush to her friends who could read to
be translated. And recorded an adequate response. He was, as she found
out, an engineer, living in a not so far off middle-class settlement. He
never questioned her intent to not respond by text messages, because
when he did send her a text to say he was busy or could not talk, she
would compensate the ‘silence’ with an emoji reflecting her reaction:
sad face, its OK face, thumbs up! She sustained and circulated an idea
about herself, a mirror reflection, akin to Narcissus but unlike him not
succumbing to it even to be the golden flower, and thus allowing herself
simultaneously to announce her presence but also transcend it. And is
not transcendence the fundamental essence of claiming the ‘self’ in most
fundamental Marxist sense towards a collective, unalienated Utopia?
Perhaps the deception was dually performed, he was not who he said, but
does it matter? This medium - an equalising encounter with the Other -
activated by ‘sonic’ exchanges allowed both of them to go ‘beyond the
given reality, the world as it is, overcoming it practically,
conceptually and ideologically'.[^7_14]

In the essay, *An Obscene Calling*, I called out the tendencies of the
hegemonic self to deny ‘emotionality’ to the other. Without extending
too much importance solely on the WhatsApp voice message feature, I
evoke it more in an illustrative sense to highlight the manner in which
this feature allowed a ‘voice’ to the emotions which otherwise remained
unactualized. Baby, of whom I also spoke in that essay and another
essay, *Subaltern as a Political Voyeur*, in the present has finally
left the services of the Tamil Brahmin household she had been with for
the last twenty years. She articulated her decision thus:

> Over the years, I have bitten my tongue on all kinds of humiliations
> they pelted on to me. Because it suited their interest, they presumed
> me to be Hindu, and such was their indifference, but also authority,
> that I had no choice to play the game. I am not complaining, they did
> a lot for the family. But I am talking more about the humiliations at
> the everyday level. Of course, there were no prescribed days of leave
> or off, and god forbid, if I chose to take one day off, the bloody
> Madam would make feel like a worm, and then giving me stale leftovers
> and me having to show gratitude for doing so. I had to constantly be
> grateful. But one day I just had enough, perhaps it is also a matter
> of age, and the fact that the family is doing well and maybe even 5
> years back I wouldn’t have been able to take the decision, but that
> day the camel’s back broke. So, one of my relatives passed away, I
> called the cunt of the Madam in the morning to say I won’t be able to
> make it today as I had to attend the funeral. Bloody behenchod
> (sisterfucker) of the Madam, first she was obviously angry and then
> she had the bloody gall to tell me, could you not have informed me
> about it yesterday? What the fuck, I thought, as if I knew that the
> relative was going to die on me; as if everything in my life should be
> aligned just so she doesn’t have to fucking do her own dishes one day.
> I hung up. But, bloody hell, was I fuming? So I took out my daughter’s
> one, and sent a voice message to hers with the bloody choicest of
> abuses, letting her know how pathetic her existence was, the passes
> her husband had made at me at least in the initial years, but also the
> little thieving I had done in her house, and the ultimate fucking bomb
> was to say, you fucking whore, you think you are very chaste, right,
> for the last twenty years you have been eating food cooked by a Muslim
> who makes the best buff kebabs. She also had Rukshar’s number, so she
> must have known who it is, but after a while I saw that she indeed
> listened to the message, the two ticks established that. I felt so
> relieved for finally letting all of it go.

The ‘voice’ that the said feature allows to the unactualized emotions
are not limited to only the encounters with the hegemonic self as the
other of the Other, the residents of the jhuggis find ingenious ways to
use this feature to express their emotionality within their own life
worlds. Whether it be in regards to communicating displeasure over a
lover paying undue attention to another by sending a ‘silent’ recorded
message, or to tell an estranged brother that in spite of the loud,
brutal recriminations and altercations, the love is still there.

Perhaps Baby’s instance sets up a notion that all encounters with the
other of the other are tense and acrimonious, and the WhatsApp voice
feature allows to perform and exert one’s presence whilst subtracting
‘real time’ implications. There are enough instances to illustrate that
these ‘sonic selfies’ - mediated via the WhatsApp voice feature - allow,
in my reckoning, an equalising (not necessarily always translating into
equitable, ethical co-habitational spaces) plane for the other to assert
their ‘presences’ to announce that they are in fact ‘present’ in the
same space-time continuum, that they in fact cannot be absented. Of
course, the same WhatsApp voice feature which enables this ‘equalising
encounter’ also comes with the capability to ‘block’ or ‘unlisten’ to
these ‘sonic selfies’. However, that conditions is predated by the fact
that the ‘presence’ has been inserted and performed.

In that, I find myself seduced by the possibilities of an ‘equalising
encounter’ of the voice feature of WhatsApp, whose imagined and intended
usage has been extended in its appropriation to be claimed to announce
‘presences’, form ‘collectives’ and practice commoning erstwhile
unavailable on the same technological platforms to the identified
others. In this essay, whilst the inspiring anchor remains the everyday
negotiations of and with the residents of the GP, the other I evoke is
the constituent group of people who are denied, structurally and
systemically, to participate in knowledge production, consumption,
circulation, recalibration and disruption processes. In that the ‘voice’
that the said feature allows has implications more far reaching than
just matters of utterances, it opens possibilities of a collectivization
which has been denied to this group. The denial of the self to the
others, of course, is the foundational premise which does not even
permit this group to participate in the ‘pervasive cultures of
narcissism’.

Within the hegemonic project, the self of the other is a muted entity.
It refuses to recognise among the others the otherwise celebrated
contours and curvatures which the hegemonic self so callously either
claims, disrupts or denies as a matter of right and choice (my own
resistance to Smartphone being a pathetic testimony to this tendency).
The hegemonic project does not want the others to be complex entities,
but static receptors without the capacities to transmit.

And thus I evoke ‘sonic selfies’, one of its particular manifestation -
the use of WhatsApp Voice feature in Smartphones - as an illustrative
instance which has evidenced the transcendental, transgressive potential
to sustain ruptures in the anxiety-ridden distancing, silencing
absenting agenda of the hegemonic forces with the encounter with the
other.

The task at hand for those of us who listen, but also have the
capacities - however limited in the broader schematic of insidious
capitalist subordination - is to activate these sites of ‘equalising
encounters’, even at the cost of disrupting, displacing and disturbing
our own positions within the comfortable womb of the hegemonic self we
so often find ourselves curling into in foetal positions when the
encounter with others becomes too real, too anxious, too neurotic.

**JD: One does not replace or subordinate the other, they intermix mash
and mingle, such that neither alone can be said to be the repository of
truth, because images circulate as conversations, we find ourselves
engaging in a new communicative form where the originality or uniqueness
of an image is less important than its common generic qualities, the
qualities that let it circulate quickly and easily that make it
contagious \[…\] It marks a contagious intensity, something about which
people have strong feelings, crowds in squares and in media are
generally diverse and tumultuous, imitation, repetition, contagion do
not imply agreement.**

There are days, whilst visiting Govindpuri, even at the cost of not
making appointments at the said time, I often find myself sat on the
road under the Govindpuri metro station, the closest one to reach to the
jhuggis. It is an overhead metro station, and the road over which Delhi
metro’s tentacles spread is one of the main arterial roads leading to
dense industrial areas of Okhala and further edges of the city. I sit
here in my quietness, sipping a tea, rolling a smoke, revelling in the
‘intermix mash and mingle’ of the ‘sonic selfies’ which are reckoned to
render this moment in space-time continuum a ‘noisy’ bearing.

Here, a pushcart with his frail attendant cries out to have his way
cleared; a man in a SUV, with rolled up windows and AC on full blast
(whose heat can be heard from a distance) keeps his hands on his horn,
because he cannot hear the din he is making; a public transport bus in
which many a lives will perhaps lose a dime or an opportunity because of
the delay, announces a rather masculine sonic intervention of its desire
to have its way; in the same bus, perhaps there is a young couple, I
find myself hoping, who are only finding out they are in love, and which
they know is forbidden, indulge in silent, slight touches amidst the
demonic dances of the ‘sonic selfies’. Here, the possibility to ‘shut
out’ is absent, and thus ‘shutting out and absenting’ of the Other
itself not an option. The multiplicity of the ‘sonic selfies’ - whether
they be the frail cries, or amplified horns, the clanking of the cycle
rickshaws which itself creates its own moment, the music that plays from
someone having a conversation on speaker mode on their mobiles, or just
using their mobiles as transmitter of songs of love and longing, or
simply lust. Or even those who lend to this ‘intermix mash and mingle’
in their silences - necessitate a moment, however momentarily, to
cohabit, to acknowledge the ‘presences’ of the others, however
unpalatable it might be to their sense of selves, to respect the logics
of the collectivization that compels an accommodation which otherwise
would be negotiated, distanced and/or silenced.

The poetics of the moment burst me into raptures of an equally poignant
political possibilities. And I want to shout out to no one in particular
and everyone in general, a spectre is haunting the world, the spectre of
othering. Let us abandon our seats as silent spectators in this
theatrics of the world drama wherein an identified other is maimed,
raped, burned, silenced without an apology in full view. Let us make the
noise.

##References
Althusser, Louis. *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings:
1978-1987*, G. M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron
(eds.) New York: Verso, 2006.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Dumped through Technology: A Policy maker's Guide to
Disenfranchising Slum Dwellers’, *Journal of Creative Communications*,
8.2-3 (2013): 265–275.

Das Gupta, Moushumi. ‘Amenities in the Slums Match up to Urban Homes’,
*Hindustan Times,* 22 March 2013,
https://www.hindustantimes.com/delhi/amenities-in-slums-match-up-to-urban-homes/story-krqsZjciIVd7pb7vsCI8iP.html.

Dean, Jodi. 'Jodie Dean - Selfie Communism', *YouTube*, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZvvH56XqCw.

Ferguson, James. *The Anti-politics Machine: 'Development',
Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho,* Minnesota
UP, 1994.

Li, Tania M. *The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the
Practice of Politics*, Duke UP, 2007, p. 126.

Lovink, Geert. ‘Narcissus Confirmed: Technologies of the Minimal Selfie’
in *Sad by Design: On Platform Nihilism*, Pluto Press, 2019, pp. 98-107.

Vishnu, Uma. ‘34% in Slums Have no Toilet, but 63% Own Mobile’, *Indian
Express, 22 March 2013,*
http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/34—in-slums-have-no-toilet-but-63--own-mobile-phone/1091573/.

Krejci, Jaroslav. ‘A New Model of Scientific Atheism, *Concurrence,*
1.1 (1969): 87.

[^7_1]: Jodi Dean, 'Jodi Dean - Selfie Communism', *YouTube*, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZvvH56XqCw. Geert Lovink, ‘Narcissus Confirmed: Technologies of the Minimal Selfie’, *Sad by Design: On Platform Nihilism*, Pluto Press, 2019, pp. 98-107.

[^7_2]: Louis Althusser, *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings: 1978-1987*, G. M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron (eds) New York: Verso, 2006.

[^7_3]: The bodily presences of the *others* itself reckoned loud, uncouth and immoral, and thus even in their ‘silent’ presences, these bodies are not desired.

[^7_4]: Office of the Registrar & Census Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, ‘Housing Stock, Amenities & Assets in Slums - Census 2011’, http://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/hlo/Slum\_table/Slum\_table.html.

[^7_5]: Tripta Chandola, ‘Dumped through Technology: A Policy Maker's Guide to Disenfranchising Slum Dwellers’, *Journal of Creative Communications*, 8.2-3 (2013), pp. 265–275.

[^7_6]: Moushumi Das Gupta, ‘Amenities in the Slums Match up to Urban Homes’, *Hindustan Times,* 22 March 2013, https://www.hindustantimes.com/delhi/amenities-in-slums-match-up-to-urban-homes/story-krqsZjciIVd7pb7vsCI8iP.html.

[^7_7]: Uma Vishnu, ‘34% in Slums Have no Toilet, but 63% Own Mobile’, *Indian Express*, 22 March 2013, http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/34—in-slums-have-no-toilet-but-63--own-mobile-phone/1091573/.

[^7_8]: Tania M. Li, *The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the Practice of Politics,* Duke University Press, 2007, p. 126.

[^7_9]: cf. James Ferguson, *The Anti-politics Machine: 'Development', Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho,* Minnesota UP, 1994.

[^7_10]: Wikipedia Contributors, ‘Economic Liberalisation in India’, *Wikipedia*, August 2014, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic\_liberalisation\_in\_India, accessed 1st April 2020.

[^7_11]: Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications, Government of India, ‘New Telecom Policy, 1994’, https://dot.gov.in/national-telecom-policy-1994.

[^7_12]: Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications, Government of India, ‘New Telecom Policy, 1999’, https://dot.gov.in/new-telecom-policy-1999.

[^7_13]: Here, I have to extend my sincere acknowledgements to Geert Lovink. It was only after hearing his talk, even though I had read the text earlier, at the Kochi Biennale, 2017, that the idea of ‘sonic selfies’ as conceptual framing began to hum a tune in my head, which I hope to have put together in symphony here.

[^7_14]: Jaroslav Krejci, ‘A New Model of Scientific Atheism, *Concurrence,* 1.1 (1969): 87.



#8. Revisiting the Housing Question 

> The breeding places of disease, the infamous holes and cellars in
> which the capitalist mode of production confines our workers night
> after night, are not abolished; they are merely shifted elsewhere! The
> same economic necessity that produced them in the first place,
> produces them in the next place. - F. Engels in The Housing Question,
> 1872.

> I was told about contractual jobs at BSES to take meter readings, and
> I was assured a position by the cousin sister who also works. I
> thought, I am going for an interview, I should dress up, and I did! I
> got matching suit and nail polish, and washed my hair, and put on
> makeup. However, when the official saw me looking so stunning and
> realised where I was from, he said in front of everyone, you are from
> the Jhuggi Jhopdi colony and want a job, you think you will be
> selected if you are looking so ‘hi-fi’. I felt very humiliated. -
> Bharti, long-time resident of the Ghevra JJ Resettlement Colony

> We like living here, we have made this settlement what it is, this is
> our home. It has been for the last 30 years, we all have been part of
> turning this \[spreading her hands around to suggest the settlement at
> large\] into what it is now. We are proud of living here, just don’t
> call us the bloody jhuggi-walahs, slum-dwellers. - Praveen Bhaaji,
> long-time resident of Navjeevan Camp, Govindpuri.

> I often wonder, these apartment-people keep saying move us, they
> complain about us, call us dirty and drunks, and treat us so
> badly...but if we are not there, who is going to wash their dishes,
> take care of their babies, do all the bloody menial work for them… -
> Nagma, long-time resident of Navjeevan Camp, Govindpuri.

> We do not want to have a city with slums \[…\] We’re working toward
> this goal, which is something that has to be achieved both on
> humanitarian grounds and in terms of beautification of the city.
> First, slum-dwellers have no place in a modern city and must often be
> moved so that new infrastructure can be built; second, destroying
> slums is a humane act. - Sheila Dixit, former Chief Minister of Delhi,
> 2002.[^8_1]

Reading these evocations in conjunction, it becomes evident that there
is an obvious need for new concepts, methodologies and frameworks to
capture the complexities of the newer forms of selves, inscriptions of
marginalisation and its disenfranchising impact the newer forms of
urbanites are producing. The Housing Question in the cities raised by
Engels in 1872, at the turn of the century, is still as relevant and
urgent, if not more, to ensure that both the idea of the city and the
reality of its experience continue to be sites of transformative
resilience and perhaps even propel towards the actualisation of the
‘right to the city’, as called out by Lefebvre, at the cornerstone of
which is a highly-evolved sense of participatory and emancipated sense
of ‘self’ of the urban citizens, including the urban margins.

In The Housing Question, Engels further insists that the significant
improvement in the working-class tenements in the 19th century
industrial towns was not on account of making living conditions for this
class better, but in fact to allow them just adequate sustenance levels
so as to assure their continued contribution to the exploitative
processes:

> Capitalist rule cannot allow itself the pleasure of creating epidemic
> diseases among the working class with impunity; the consequences fall
> back on it and the angel of death rages in its ranks as ruthlessly as
> in the ranks of the workers \[…\] As soon as this fact had been
> scientifically established the philanthropic bourgeois began to
> compete with one another in noble efforts on behalf of the health of
> their workers.[^8_2]

Sheila Dixit, who reigned Delhi’s ‘Clean Delhi, Green Delhi’ campaign to
put the city on the world map as a ‘world-class city’, particularly
towards hosting the Commonwealth Games, 2010, was Delhi’s Chief Minister
between 1998-2013. It was during her tenure that the city witnessed the
highest number of slum demolitions in the city particularly towards the
cleaning drive. Her justification of these demolitions on ‘humanitarian’
grounds resounds with the *‘philanthropic bourgeois’* attempts that
Engels insists on; furthermore, the grander agenda of the
‘beautification of the city’ which justified these demolitions are in
alignment of the tendencies highlighted by Engels in 1871 instead of
being an aberration. The ‘politics of aesthetics’, invisibilizing the
undesired bodies and spaces and the disciplining agendas that were
subsequently instituted were not a particularity of the Indian
neo-liberal urban spaces, post 1991 when the Indian economy was opened,
but in fact characteristic of the very mode of production of capitalism.

The body of the slum dweller, or any identified urban marginal group, in
the city is considered to inhabit illegal spaces. The notions of a
‘sacrilege centre’ inscribes on the bodies of and from the ‘vulgar
margins’. These, in turn, systematically produces an anxiety about the
‘peripheral bodies’ in the urban imaginations thus impacting and
effecting the entries of these bodies in otherwise reckoned democratic
and open spaces. By employing overt, subtle, and insidious strategies,
the imagined ‘peripheral bodies’ is subjected to civilizing and
disciplining agendas. This violence (on these bodies) at an everyday
level not only limits their agency to negotiate with the urban systems,
but also lend to perpetuating and sustaining *similar* body politic of
control and surveillance within their own contexts. And thus *spatial
agency* as a basic right towards equitable urban futures to calibrate
*space in the city remains un-actualized* when *space of the body* – as
a fundamental assertion of one’s identity in the city – itself becomes
‘heterotopias of deviation’.

And here, the testimonies of Bharti, Praveen Bhaaji and Nagma, and
similar accounts, which inform my position, further complicates the
methodological approaches and interventions in addressing the housing
concerns for the urban margins. The predicament of those on the urban
margins - the slum dwellers, the residents of the resettlement colonies,
the migrants, the homeless - is caught in the cul-de-sac of their
bodies’ labour desired for the task that goes into the ‘beautification
of the city’, and in fact in running the meticulous, exploitative
machinery of the city, however the presence of these bodies evokes
disgust. Thus: the space of the body of those on the urban margins and
the body of the space (by the way of the sight of the slums, the
homeless squatters and similar spaces) both are haunted by the spectre
of precarity, vulnerability and illegality. Without taking into
cognizance the lived experience and realities of the urban poor, the
methodologies and approaches informing the housing policies and plans
for the same will continually and cyclically endure the fate of Engel’s
prediction of being ‘merely shifted elsewhere’. Bharti’s testimony from
a resettlement colony is but an affirmation of this finding fruition.

Housing is not merely a matter of infrastructural concern. Particularly
for the urban poor who are amongst the most marginalised and precarious
constituent groups in the cities, the ease, access and availability of
adequate housing is determinant in not only shaping their present but
also securing their future and long-term aspirations. The existing
approach is limited by the very *limited* manner in which it engages
with the ‘real housing conditions’ for the in the cities. The future
research design and focus needs to consider the capacities existing and
needed to ensure sustainable, livable futures (with focus on housing
demands/needs/conditions) in the city among the urban poor. And the
manner in which housing issues impact not only the present but also
actualisation of future aspirations for the informal sector in the
workers. One of the key ways in which these research can contribute to
policy discussions is by generating data sets, insights and
understandings to inform and define parameters for what ‘livable and
inclusive’ cities for this constituent section of the population in the
city means. A key lacunae in understanding the ‘livability’ for the
urban poor is the lack of, or very limited, insights available to
capture the overall ‘well-being’ - social, cultural, psychological -
encountered by the urban poor as articulated by themselves.

The lived experiences of the urban poor, more often than not, fail to
find way into policy framing and considerations. The fault line lies not
so much in the ‘intentions’ but the methodological and conceptual
approaches which inform these studies. In my doctoral thesis, drawing on
a five-year long ethnographic research in the Govindpuri slums, I
proposed *listening* as a methodological intervention to engage with the
everyday negotiations of its residents. It recounts the experiences and
encounters of the slum-dwellers in relation to the space they inhabit.
The fulcrum to engage with these narratives was the practice of
*listening*, privileging what, how, when and why the slum-dwellers
listen in and into. The matter of agreeing upon *listening(s)* as a
trope of engagement with the slum-dwellers about their everyday was not
intentional and strategic; instead whilst 'hanging around' the slums the
intent, urgency and anxiety amongst the residents to articulate their
sense of selves employing their own referential vocabulary was realised
in their listening practices.

In my doctoral thesis, drawing on a five-year long ethnographic research
in the Govindpuri slums, I proposed *listening* as a methodological
intervention to engage with the everyday negotiations of its residents.
It recounts the experiences and encounters of the slum-dwellers in
relation to the space they inhabit. The fulcrum to engage with these
narratives was the practice of *listening*, privileging what, how, when
and why the slum-dwellers listen in and into. The matter of agreeing
upon *listening(s)* as a trope of engagement with the slum-dwellers
about their everyday was not intentional and strategic; instead whilst
'hanging around' the slums the intent, urgency and anxiety amongst the
residents to articulate their sense of selves employing their own
referential vocabulary was realised in their listening practices.

In that sense: in my research I was not only keen on what the residents
of the slums were *listening into,* but also – both as a methodological
and political position – to privilege the ‘ears’ of the slum-dwellers.

These *listening(s)* of the slum-dwellers into their everyday practices
also allowed insights into the wider social, cultural, spatial,
emotional, sensorial and political cosmos of the slum. The importance is
exaggerated as these insights about the slum-dwellers rarely find their
way into the official *sarkari or* bureaucratic records. The
*listening(s)* of the slum-dwellers then not only complements the
readings of the official records but also complicates them. It does so
by inserting and amplifying the *voice* of the marginalized,
disenfranchised poor by considering and recognizing their position in
the city, its broader urban planning policies and socio-cultural
fabrics, as actualized, appropriated and critiqued by them. Insisting on
these *listening(s)* also lends to a broader political mandate by
extending a self-reflexive agency to the slum-dwellers, allowing them a
platform to comment on what they make of *what* (by which I mean
policies, popular middle-class imaginations, public discourse) is done
to them. In short, whilst we know enough about what is done to the urban
poor, these *listening(s)* **in fact** allow us to hear into what the
urban poor do about what is done to them. The importance of these
*listening(s)* is paramount in extending a ‘voice’ to the marginalized
to identify and articulate their own demands depending on the lived
experiences which continually expose their vulnerability of systemic,
structural and immediate concerns.

The methodological framework of listening allows for these lived
realities become a key focus on how poor communities organize and
navigate precarity shape existing governance capacities and alter urban
poverty as a way of life towards resilient, inclusive and sustainable
futures. Towards truly achieving the mandate of ‘Right to the City’, it
is essential to develop critical insights into whether spatial ‘access’
translates into the constituent population being able to accrue
long-term material, social and cultural capital for a more consolidated
‘well-being’ in the city. The policy framing, actionable investments and
future research needs to direct its efforts towards meeting the housing
and living conditions for the urban poor in a holistic manner, such that
this constituent group of city’s residents can also claim these spaces
as their ‘homes’ with pride, dignity, self-respect and assurance.

The last two decades have witnessed the landscapes of the Indian cities
undergoing significant transformations. For both the long-term residents
and the newer-arrivals, these urban landscapes are at once sites
allowing possibilities for realities and aspirations erstwhile
unimaginable to be actualized and spaces where social, structural and
systemic violence and discriminations are strategically reproduced and
reinforced. The re-calibrating sites, processes and manifestations of
violence, disenfranchisement and marginalization in the transforming
urban landscapes also necessitate theoretical, methodological and
political interventions towards the project of democratic, just and
equitable futures for the city as spaces and sites of ethical
cohabitation.

To end, perhaps at a polemical (and also pessimistic) tone, considering
a disruption in the capitalist mode of production, which as Engels
identified will only continue to reproduce the question of the housing
for the urban poor, is not an imminent reality and which thus also
limiting the actualization of the ‘Right to the City’ and thereby
possibility resilient urban futures. After all, if there is an ongoing
contestation of claims to spaces, identities and sense of ‘self’ for the
urban poor in the manner in which they never really become ‘urban’, as
identified by Lefebrve, in that, ‘they come to see participation not as
speaking at a public hearing or serving on a citizens’ panel, but as the
living struggle for a city that is controlled by its inhabitants’, how
does one truly envisage extending the capacities to the urban poor to
empower them into resilient futures?

And, here methodologically, I want to make a rather bold intervention:
whilst it is of utmost significance to *listen into* the lived and
experienced realities of the urban poor and to constantly employ
innovative methodological tools to inform policy, there is also an
urgent need to add another constituent group in the city in the
endeavours of educating them: the middle-classes. Resounding through
Nagma’s prescient question, *what will they do without us,* the
middle-classes need to be made brutally cognizant of the fact that their
modern, clean, sanitized, world-class claims and desires for the city
will in fact remain a distant dream if the urban poor are not given
dignified and equitable presence in their imagination, encounters and
reality. It is only when everyone in the city is recognised as its
*inhabitants* that urban resilient futures will be actualised.

Lastly, in revisiting the housing question which is yet to be realised,
one cannot overlook the first, foremost and fundamental question: *for
whom and towards what futures* are the Smart, World-Class, and Resilient
cities being imagined?

The spectres that haunt the very livability of the urban poor are yet to
be resolved, and which then compels the reckoning that instead of
propelling towards smartness, beautification and resilience what is of
urgency is to recognise across registers the complex and delicate
manners in which conditions of precarity are intertwined such that the
burden of resilient, ethical co-habitational spaces is a collective
endeavour and responsibility.

##References
Engels, Frederick. *The Housing Question*, 1872 (transcribed Zodiac,
June, 1995), https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1872/housing-question/.

Gentleman, Amelia. ‘Poor Lose Homes as Delhi Clean up for Games’, *International Herald Tribute*, 2 January 2007.

[^8_1]: Amelia Gentleman, ‘Poor Lose Homes as Delhi Clean up for Games’, International Herald Tribute, Paris, 2 January 2007

[^8_2]: Frederick Engels, *The Housing Question*, 1872.


# 9. To Whom Do You ‘Beautifully’ Belong? The Slums’ Response (If Indeed They Were Allowed the Tongues): Or, The Rite of Passage to the Right to the City: But, Where Is the Self of the Slums? 

I begin with a poetic evocation:

*'Their relationship consisted*
<br/>*in discussing if it existed’*

\- Thom Gunn, *Jamesian*.[^9_1]

After almost two-decade of slumming, so to say, it is in these two brief
lines that I am finally able to locate (and articulate) the relationship
between the city and the slums. The core of this cathartic relationship
is not defined by the existence of the slums or the manner in which the
slums come into existence, but is in fact determined by negotiating the
modalities of dealing (or in fact not dealing ) with the *existing* of
the slums in the city. Central to these discussions - one-sided, and
deliberated by the hegemonic voices with both control over the
means/modes of production and determined intent of maintaining control
over the expropriation of resources - is the strategic, systemic and
structural denial of the sense of self to the slums. This denial of self
to the slums manifests in varied ways in the everyday negotiations to
the imaginative accommodation of these spaces in the future of the city.
The denial of the self of the slums is not always predicated on intent
of design or deliberation but informed - overtly, insidiously or subtly
- by the processes of estrangement, alienation, dehumanisation and
depersonalisation central to the capitalist machinery and reducing the
labour as its living appendage.

In this essay, I draw attention to the manner in which dehumanization of
the slums (and its residents), with particular insistence on denial of
its emotionality, is and will remain a crucial impediment to the
actualisation of the call of the ‘Right to the City’ until significant
discursive shifts are compelled. I will also highlight the manner in
which the ‘anxiety of proximity[^9_2]’ with the slums in the everyday
interactions, in urban planning processes but also in academic and
activist undertakings, however well-intentioned, further lends to
reducing and relegating the slums to an ‘infantile, perennially
peripheral and an abnormality’ reckoning. Lastly, towards the mandate of
actualising the ‘right to the city’, as Lefebvre envisaged in the manner
of an ongoing, urgent utopian project whilst not succumbing to the
tendencies of ‘unimaginative realism’, the essay insists the need of the
hour is to discursively shift from the ‘moral, humanitarian,
communitarian, paternalistic’ evocations whilst engaging with the
concerns of the slums to collective, ethical responsiveness and
democratic participation in the urban futures by both sounding and
responding to the clarion call for a revolution which shifts its focus
to, as Lefebvre emphasises, ‘defined either in terms of the political
change at the level of the state or else in terms of the collective or
state ownership of the means of production’. He further insists, that
‘such limited definitions of revolution will no longer suffice. The
transformation of society presupposes a collective ownership and
management of space founded on the permanent participation of the
“interested parties”’ with their multiple, varied and even contradictory
interests. This revolutionary project, Lefebvre continues, ‘whether
utopian or realistic, must, if it is to avoid hopeless banality, make
the reappropriation of the body, in association with the reappropriation
of space, into a non-negotiable part of its agenda’.[^9_3]

Lefebrve’s call for the ‘right to the city’ is a theoretical,
philosophical and political project toward an ongoing, dialogic
negotiation which involves inhabitants engaging each other in meaningful
interactions, interactions through which they overcome their separation,
come to learn about each other, and deliberate together about the
meaning and future of the city. These encounters make apparent to each
inhabitant their existence in and dependence on a web of social
connections. They come into consciousness of themselves as inhabitants,
as embedded in a web of social connections, as dependent on and stewards
of ‘the urban’. As they become conscious in this way, they recognize the
need to struggle against the industrial capitalist city and for the
urban. They come to see participation not as speaking at a public
hearing or serving on a citizens’ panel, but as the living struggle for
a city that is controlled by its inhabitants.

In responding to the discussions about the right to the cities, the
symptomatology that presents itself are two-folds: why does the ‘right
to the city’ still remain an un-actualized project, particularly within
the Lefebrevian intent and as David Harvey articulates towards ‘the
greater democratic control over the production and use of surplus’?[^9_4]
And, why do the existence of the slums deliberate the discussions (or,
the lack thereof or when in fact undertaken in skewed and stunted) and
sustained anxiety? The prognosis of this diagnostic examination is that
the denial of the ‘self’ of the slums is a conditioned impediment which
perpetually defers the moment and momentum to accrue the critical
threshold essential to actualise the first and overcome the second
symptomplogy.

I begin with a personal admission of my initial encounter with the
slums. Even though now I claim and demand intimacy, embedded
relationships and investments in and with the slums, the first couple of
years were nothing less than fraught with anxiety. I was adequately
acquainted (and sincerely) believed in the ‘right’ left politics of the
rights of the marginalised, the politics and violence of displacement
and disenfranchisement, but left to my own devices of having to spend
hours into days in the lanes of the slums, I found myself ill-equipped
to deal and negotiate with the emotions the intensity of the slums
materiality, pervasive everydayness of the denial of internalised –
which the residents encountered merely on account of being
slum-dwellers. But my anxiety was far more insidious (in response to my
own limited experiential encounters with the slums but also responding
to the popular/mainstream reckoning of the slums). In short, at times I
was scared, at other times, violently angered by gendered, communal,
caste practices within the slums, and at still other times found myself
deeply drawn to a few and took a strong dislike to others.

In the essay, *In Search of the Slums Never-Lost*, I discuss these
encounters at length. However, here, I want to insist on the *knot in
the stomach* that I perpetually felt during my early days of forays into
the slums. This sense particularly heightened to intensifying crescendo
- which often left me debilitated, emotionally, politically and
intellectually - when I started pursuing research towards my doctoral
research. I no longer had the convenience of a project’s mandate to hide
behind (which initially brought me into the slums); I had chosen to be
here. I had written an impassioned proposal, ‘re-drawing the lines’
about the engaging, exploring and eventually ‘revealing’ the selves of
the slums which not only most did not want to acknowledge, let alone
encounter. Among my middle-class cohorts and friends, I chided them, I
accused them of classist positionalities, I was quick to make a
judgement: ‘what the fuck do you know, I, only I, know the reality, I
have ventured into the lanes, I have broken bread with “them”, they are
my friends’, and so on and so forth. For performative purposes, such
anguished cries from a bleeding heart often got me the attention I was
precisely evoking it to achieve attention, a shoulder to cry on, and
sometimes, a long embrace into a dark night.

But, when the mornings beckoned and I had to set out to the slums, the
*knot in the stomach* gripped the being of me. I felt hollow and
hypocritical, the embraces and attention from the nights pungent. I
theoretically knew enough about working the hyphen to speak of the
knotty entanglements and messiness poetically and politically. However
in the ‘now and present’ of conducting research, I found myself in such
knotty entanglements that the ‘selves of the other’ presented themselves
more as hauntings from far-distant shores.

I begin with an intensely personalised account my own encounter with the
slums to insist that (and particularly to the group of aspiring
academics, activists, or fundamentally as the collective custodians of
urban futures) that however well-intentioned, politically sound,
theoretically rigorous one’s position is, the ‘encounter’ with the other
– here, the slums – irrespective of its essentiality (either traumatic
or otherwise tantalising) demands reflexivity. Because ‘as such, the
encounter constitutes the link between stability and change, determinacy
and contingency, theory and practice. It is therefore one of the key
elements to unlock a new materialist understanding of political
transformation. The encounter is also the connecting thread between
politics and aesthetics’.[^9_5] But there are more fundamental
implications lending and leading to the ‘denial of the self of the
slums’. Masking one’s own anxiety – as a researcher, activist, and an
academic - particularly when it is from the vantage point of privilege
at the intersectionality of class, caste, gendered, and communal
affiliations only goes as far as to suffices as not dealing with the
*knot in the stomach.* But these anxieties nevertheless find their ways
of accommodation in academic texts, policy documents, activists
interventions, and thus the insidious task of obliterating the self of
the slums is set in motion. If the other does not have the agency to
evoke a response, stir an emotion, does the other even has capacity to
emote? And if the other in fact cannot emote, how can the other be
trusted or even recognised to have the ability to make decisions,
determinations unto themselves?

I sought out guidance from the non-state actors both working with the
slums of Govindpuri and those involved in broader concerns of the
‘rights of the slums’. I took recourse to academic texts to if not find
a ‘guide’ - *a kunji -* to this slumming, but at least a hint of the
similar anxiety experienced and articulated by other researchers and
academics. I was left wanting from both of these engaged groups in the
concerns of the ‘slums’.

The overarching tendency of the non-state actors and activists was \[and
continues\] to situate the slums as a draining resources of the state:
‘demented; lazy; and prone to avarice and indulgences of the morally
compromised sorts’. The more well-intentioned of the sorts, among this
group, treated the same constituent group in a highly, paternalistic,
patronising manner: ‘but, they don’t know really know what they want,
they have all the wrong priorities’. And, ‘of course, you cannot discuss
politics with them, particularly when you find their views problematic,
do not ‘antagonize them; they don’t know better’, was the advice given
to me by a very senior slum activist in the city, when I was in the
midst of pursuing my research on political formations within the slums
of Govindpuri and which finds it way in the essay, *The Subaltern as a
Political Voyeur.*

> Of course, I recognise and do stand for the rights of the slums, but
> do they have to live so close to us. I am a single woman, I bought
> this flat for the peace, solitude it offers and now this filth, I feel
> scared \[…\] I have never walked the arterial road connecting her
> apartment block through the two camps of the slums to the main road,
> and thank god for the aircon in the car, I have never rolled down the
> windows, that way I can not only avoid the noise but also the smells.

Thus reckoned a self-proclaimed left-leaning political scientist living
in the apartment block across the road from Navjeevan Camp about her
neighbours in Govindpuri. During my doctoral research, in response to my
question about why the residents of the slums where in fact allowed in
the intimate, domestic spaces of the middle-class households in the
capacity of drivers, house-help, nannies and such, the usual refrain
was, ‘our houses are civilized \[…\] left to their own whims, it then
they get the crazies; it is actually not their fault, it is where they
live’.

In the academic texts, I felt even more fraught, I could not relate to
the ‘researcher’ venturing about the slums in these accounts. The lanes,
conversations and the experiences of the slums for the researchers in
these texts were bereft of the ‘anxiety’ I found myself engulfed in.
Here, the position of the ethnographer is eulogized vesting in her
unlimited and unrestricted access to venture into a ‘site’ with the
‘subjects’ more than eager to reveal their histories, experiences, and
lives. And the fact of the matter is that, and recounting from my own
personal encounters in the slums of Govindpuri, but also in other
marginalized spaces, yes, indeed, as a middle-class, educated person
embodying structural privileges, I (and most other researchers) have
unlimited, or at least unquestioned, access into these spaces. But
this admission is very rarely made. And even rarer is the
acknowledgement that if the positions and spaces of research and
researched were reversed, would the middle-class researcher in fact
allow herself to be researched; and particularly if the interlocutor
came from the margins?

The answers to this question are difficult to find, not because the
answer is easy, but because the gated community of academic scholarship
on slums has collectively agreed on never allowing these questions to be
raised.

These reckoning of the slums – and their representations – at the most
fundamental level set the tonality, and thus the practices, of the
‘denial of the self of the slums’. Here, even whilst high-pitched calls
for the voice and agency of the slum-dwellers is made for, the manner in
which they are ‘represented’ the slums come across in monochromatic,
passive and ‘not fully evolved’ entities in the Marxian sense. Thus, if
both the ‘needs and there fulfilment’ of the ‘other’ in fact can only be
identified and met with by their benefactors’, can the ‘other’ than be
reckoned to have any capacity of ‘self-determination’? The flattening of
the anxiety of the researcher’s - their *knot in the stomach* never
really acknowledged - thus also lends to the *knotty entanglements* on
the field and the multiplicity of the selves of the other being
flattened out.

The otherwise ‘harmless’ practices which are commonplace (and deeply
embedded in class, caste, gendered, and communal prejudices) in
middle-class households, are enacted in different and varying manners
across activists and academic engagements with the slums. The most
commonplace of these are: more often than not *not* acknowledging the
residents by their names; very rarely deconstructing, or at least
discussing, the mandate and agenda of the project at hand in its
entirety (to make explicit the web of connections, etc.); to discuss the
arguments drawn from these engagements, to attempt to ‘deconstruct the
space of theory and politics’ for the otherwise celebrated residents of
the slums as collaborators. The framing to ‘mobilise, engage and
involve’ the residents, more often than not, is in the vein of ‘we are
conducting this research/campaign for you? We will fight for your
rights’. And almost always, the researcher never returns to the ‘site’
to discuss how far he travelled with the ‘insights’ and the tales he
wove, the argument he made and the publications accreditations he got.

In my doctoral research, I conducted an ethnography of everyday
interactions within the slums of Govindpuri and with their middle-class
neighbours through the politics of sound. The research highlighted the
nuanced practices and processes of ‘othering’ the residents of the slums
enacted both within the slums (across class, caste, gendered and
communal vectors) but also that the middle-classes are reckoned as
‘immoral, corrupt and repugnant’ as the latter views them. Over the
years, I have closely followed the lives of sex-workers,
domestic-workers (both, men and women in different capacities) and
manual labourers, among others.

Of course the residents of the slums – in different capacities of the
permissible encounters – with their *others* are well aware of the
*othering* they are subjected to and it is recognised as stripping them
of their selfhood, requiring them of performances of passivity,
invisibility, unbecoming and unlistening. The residents of the slums are
very well aware of the ‘benefits’ that can be accrued from their
encounters with non-state actors - activists, researchers, and
academics, and thus the residents are also well-versed in ‘performing
poverty, helplessness, and speaking of oneself only in vocabularies of
lackings’. These performativities of dehumanising themselves in
repressed and perverted ways extends in not only in their interactions
with the state agencies and in accessing infrastructural and fundamental
services – banks, hospitals and schools.

The residents have their own strategies to deal with this ‘othering’ -
there is Baby who had worked in a Tamil-Brahmin household for past
twenty years and who on the first ‘encounter’ with Baby assumed of her
Hindu, widowed status for the lack of adornments maintained thus with
them not revealing her identity as a Muslim woman, well aware that she
would be asked to quit. Babita, the sex worker, who to maintain
associations with a regular client who pays for her rent, sometimes
afford her children’s fees and other necessities to ‘bathe with filtered
water’ - using the expensive water filter which he installed – so as to
maintain his ‘purity’. She chides behind his back, that not only does
she not use the filtered water for herself but also not whilst preparing
a bath for him as well, and thus adulterates him. The men who work as
drivers for middle-class ‘*madams and their daughters’* share very
intimate space and are privy to their intimate ongoings and discussions
admit to performing ‘unlistening’, find it particularly amusing that
these women assume they don’t understand English, and in doing so
discuss the details of their ‘ongoings’ in salacious manner. In
particular when it is regarding the young women from nearby apartment
blocks, it often leads to the said young women being targeted in rather
unbecoming ways, but also leads to these men exercising far more control
over their women so that they do not start emulating those way. The
women in the slums find it particularly difficult to find redressal for
domestic, sexual and other kinds of abuse, or assert their claims or
articulate their emotions. Until 2012, when the Indian state ruled
attempt to suicide not a criminal offence, it was not an uncommon
‘threat (and at times put in effect) of 376'.[^9_6] However, since it has
been ruled that ‘attempt to suicide’ is decriminalised but not abetment
to suicide, the practice of , ‘drinking just enough phenyl, calling in
100 number \[the national helpline number to call the police
authorities\] and negotiating whilst or before the cops are summoned for
testimony with those harassing’ has become a popular manner in which the
women seek redressal. The sex-workers in Govindpuri, who during India
Against Corruption, 2011, and following Demonization, 2018, had to
extend their ‘services’ not only to the local police personnel
threatening them with consequences but also to local shopkeepers for
their daily upkeep, and used to effectively to maintain their work,
ensure their children’s education and maintain the household upkeep.

Whilst it is seductive to reckon these acts as performance of the
assertion of the self of the slums, these assertions accrue any currency
of recognition when performed across two registers – either by being
violent or by implicating themselves – however imaginary – in the acts
of violence. The ruthlessness of the violence inflicted is often masked
within the rhetoric of benevolence; in that they are in fact being
extended 'legitimate' claims to history, memory and culture. The lack of
acknowledgement to their 'emotionality' is yet another strategy (though
seemingly insidious and instinctive) to perpetuate their violence. For:
if the residents of the slums were indeed identified as 'emotionally'
capable they would have to be acknowledged to have capabilities of
'individual' expression, which would then extend to acknowledging their
'collective' identities as well. However this denial of emotionality
does not imply that their 'performance' or 'expression of self' in the
public, or for that matter in their private spaces, is not
unacknowledged. In fact the performance is constantly scrutinized;
however it is not engaged within the framework of expression of 'self'
but as a gross deviance from the 'modern, disciplined and self-governed'
in their infantile, delinquent manner demanding disciplining.

The self of the other is only permitted as much space as the capitalist
modes of productions can accommodate, and that is the fundamental
impediment in the actualisation of the ‘right to the city’ as envisaged
by Lefebvre at the centre of which is an inhabitant who has a solid,
undeniable core which then facilitates ‘encounters’ of democratic,
dialogic, participatory negotiations. To state the obvious, it is not an
easy task, intellectually, culturally, theoretically, socially, to
engage in a discussion about ‘slums or their right to the city’ because
most of these calls are made within the very system – the capitalist
modes of production and negotiations which produce them in the first
instance as Engels pointed in 1872 and which remains still relevant.

This was particularly revealed when during the course of my doctoral
research, my intent and presence was particularly found disconcerting
when I was categorical about the fact that I was not interested in
knowing about their poverty levels but just about themselves; and in all
truthfulness, it was in these encounters and hanging about that
*listening as a methodological framework* had its genesis. Whilst
pursuing the DFID research to examine ‘The Role of ICTs in Poverty
Alleviation’, armed with an questionnaire, I would venture into the
*jhuggis,* with entitlement and no regard for the personal, political,
poetic, privacy positions of the residents to fill out details of their
financial profiles - how much you earn, where do you spend, how much,
why, why not - to essentially determine whether they in fact qualified
as poor enough or not. The poverty - as imagined to be experienced
within the mandate of the project - had to be validated by the poor,
and as always in review discussions later there were doubts raised about
the *authenticity* of their claims, what were they under-reporting, how
to really ‘expose’ them.

Needless to say when I was allowed an opportunity to pursue my own
research intent in the *jhuggis,* even though the questions evaded me, I
was determined in the resolve of not discussing *poverty* with the poor.
The poverty, the deprivations, the limited infrastructural
availabilities were not a *secret* that had to be unravelled. It was
obscenely obvious, and from my political, intellectual position, it was
a bloody insult to the intelligence of the residents to ask them to
spell it out.

Instead I decided to just *listen* into the manner in which the given
conditions and manifestations of deprivations lend and lead to the
experiences within the broader political, emotional, social,
aspirational cosmos which the residents could claim, denied to and
subverted. In and through these acts of everyday practice, I wanted (and
still continue) to insist on that the diverse experiences of *poverty* -
social, financial, political, emotional - impact on the capacity to
claim and enact citizenship as a rightful, legislative, constitutional
right.

The material form in these inquisitions was never-absented, its roofs,
corners, crevices (or lack of thereof) became one of the ways in which
everyday was experienced living in conditions that mark the
infrastructural, emotional, political and social landscape in and within
the lanes of the *jhuggis* in Govindpuri in my works. However, I reflect
now, there was a matter of deliberation and intent - though not
conscious and well articulated - to not insist on the anatomy of the
material form, per se, as its presence was one of the most obvious and
bearing manifestations of the *poverty* that specific discourses and
practices insisted on.

Perhaps it was the keenness to *listen* that also confounded me
regarding the participation and claims of the residents of the slums in
the city that was dramatically transforming towards the Commonwealth
Games, 2010, whilst I was pursuing my doctoral research. The academic
texts and activist discourse were singularly intent on highlighting the
manner in which the transformations were unleashing new politics of
middle-class aesthetics in the city, and in which the slums and its
residents had no place. In retrospect I acknowledge my naivete to reckon
these accounts with absolute veracity of absolute truth. And thus I
approached the residents of the Govindpuri slums with precise critique
and assumed collective indignant response to the devastating fate our
city was being held hostage to. I was *silenced* and *sidelined* on
several occasions, more than a few residents took immense pride and
delight in how their city would become one of the world-class ones, that
there will be roads and infrastructure, and new airports and other
similar facilities to showcase to the world. One of the camps of the
Govindupuri slums, Navjeevan camp, has a very robust market catering to
the construction industry, mostly the scaffolding that is essential in
these enterprises. Commonwealth Games provided them the boost as never
before, both the retailer and the workforce from the slums were not only
proud but announced themselves as significant ‘contributors’ to the
changes the city was witnessing. I am yet to come across any such
assertive expressions of claiming participation in the transformation of
the city from the residents of the slums in the texts, which in fact
rely on ethnographic accounts to make statements about the manner in
which the very slum-dwellers appear as passive agents.

There are tactics of complicity, duplicity and possibilities of
‘inter-liveability’ on which these relationships are precariously and
delicately balanced. Here, the conceptual framing of ‘people as
infrastructure’ by AbdouMaliq Simone while discussing the inner city of
Johannesburg in the context of racial tensions in a volatile,
transforming city holds particular relevance. In this formulation:

> Ways of doing and representing things become increasingly ‘conversant’
> with one another. They participate in a diversifying series of
> reciprocal exchanges, so that positions and identities are not fixed
> or even, at most times, determinable. These ‘urbanized’ relations
> reflect neither the dominance of a narrative or linguistic structure
> nor a chaotic, primordial mix.[^9_7]

In mapping the diverse, overlapping and intersecting networks,
modalities and landscapes of living precariously, there is an urgent
need to engage, expose and arrive at the ‘traumatic core’ of the
tensions underlying it. This is not merely an ambitious,
well-intentioned, romantic agenda. In my reckoning, only the task of
revealing these densities, connections and intersections of living with
conditions of precariousness will highlight the real, banal of the
‘other’ which is systematically absented and invisibilized by the state
and other hegemonic narratives. The absence of such engagement often
leads to these communities being caught in another kind of totalizing
Borgesian–Kafkaesque narrative without any scope of liberation. The
image of the ‘other’ as precarious can only be disrupted by demolishing
the myths and representations of the distancing and othering it is
predicated on. The demystification of the ‘other’, by highlighting the
structural, systemic and material conditions which produce the
conditions for this othering in the first place, then announces itself
as the political project which researchers across disciplines ought to
align themselves to.

Slums are representative spaces of what the city ‘ought not to’.
However, an equally persistent, subtle threat is of the city turning
into a colossal slum, given the rate of development, population
increase, and lack of infrastructural facilities. In that sense, slums
stand out as a demonic, prophetic instance of ‘*what could be*’ but
‘*ought not to be*’.

A paternalistic disciplining agenda is inherent to these narratives
which is symptomatic of the broader anxiety of the dominant structures
and narratives to allow for emotionality, and thus an identification of
a well-defined and claimed sense of ‘self’ to the marginalized spaces
and communities. Slums are heterotopic spaces in the city. They are both
dreaded and desired. The former for its 'potential' to disrupt the
fundamental core of social-moral values owing to the imaginations it
evokes on account of its density, dirt, and digressions – social,
cultural and moral. And it is within this dreaded potentiality for
digressions lies its perverse desire.

However this desire rarely translates into a direct engagement with the
space, but manifests itself in the hyperbolic interest in situating the
position of the slums in the 'present' of the city. Slums are
strategically denied a 'self' as it allows them to accommodate the
anxiety about their 'otherness' across political, intellectual, social,
cultural and, indeed, emotional manifestations. In its most fundamental
aspect it completely disenfranchises slums of any 'identity' and thus
its assertion. It systematically limits their 'right to the city'. This
fundamental disenfranchisement further extends into denying the slums
and its residents the possibility to imagine an (or any) other. The
denial of the 'self' of the slums in discursive spaces, middle-class
imagination and mainstream representation is then logically extended to
unacknowledging any 'emotional' capacity or its performance,
emotionality. This double denial, first of the 'self' of the slums and
then the possibility of othering by the other translates not only in
immediate disenfranchisement, but also significantly allows for the
displacement of the marginalized both in the historical and futuristic
imagination of the urban. The peculiarity of the suspended displacement
in the imagination of the state is not incidental, but strategic. It
owing to this suspension that the demolition, displacement or the
violence inflicted on the slums finds justification as it is understood
that they neither have any historicity nor any future claims to the
memory and culture of the space they inhabit. That until ‘re-settled’ by
the state, they exist in a void.

The right to the city for those on the margins ought to manifest in
their capacities to reject the city without the fear, threat and/or
violence of being expunged. For this relationship between the hegemonic
forces and the marginalised to be premised on a non-negotiable pact of
neither imposing or nor insisting on displacement. To reckon of this
relationship as a love affair wherein the lover and the loved with,
without, besides and in spite of any disruptions have and do accommodate
the other. Accommodation has to be the critical factor here, to be able
to throw a sulk, hide in a corner, turn your head away but not throw the
tantrum of expunging the lover (or loved). In this analogy at varying
times, the loved one is representative of the hegemonic forces, and
whilst the lover retains the power to alleviate the status of the
former, its position is still shrouded in precarity. For the
marginalised to walk recklessly the streets with the swagger in the hips
of the confidence that none can halt us.

And thus, if indeed the self of the slums were recognised, and if in the
hegemonic forces in the manner of an entitled lord in *The High Bid*,
the play from which the title of this talks draws from, inquires of a
valet he fancies, ‘to whom do you “beautifully” belong?’[^9_8] And thus
divesting the valet in the play and the slums in the city of any sense
of ‘self’ and only acknowledging them as propertied entities to be
exchange hands, one imagines slums respond resoundingly:

Do I contradict myself?
<br/>Very well then I contradict myself;
<br/>(I am large, I contain multitudes.)[^9_9]

##References
Althusser, Louis. *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings: 1978-1987,* G.M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron
(eds) New York: Verso, 2006.

Gunn, Thom. *Jamesian*, http://psa.fcny.org/psa/poetry/poetry\_in\_motion/atlas/atlanta/jamesian/.

James, Henry. *The High Bid.*

Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City’, *New Left Review,*
September-October 2008,
https://newleftreview.org/issues/II53/articles/david-harvey-the-right-to-the-city.

Lefebvre, Henri. *The Production of Space*, trans. D. Nicholson-Smith,
Oxford: Blackwell, 1991 (1974), p. 422.

Simone, AbdouMaliq. ‘People as Infrastructure: Intersecting Fragments in
Johannesburg’, *Public Culture*, 16.3 (2004): 407–429.

Whitman, Walt. ‘Song of Myself, 51’, in D. McKay, *Leaves of Grass,*
1900.

Zizek, Slavoj. ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the
Stalinist Show Trials’, Olin Auditorium, Bard College, 16 November,
1999.

[^9_1]: Thom Gunn, *Jamesian,* http://psa.fcny.org/psa/poetry/poetry\_in\_motion/atlas/atlanta/jamesian/.

[^9_2]: Slavoj Žižek, ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the Stalinist Show Trials’, Olin Auditorium, Bard College, 16 November, 1999.

[^9_3]: Henri Lefebvre, *The Production of Space*, trans. D. Nicholson-Smith, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991 (1974), p. 422.

[^9_4]: David Harvey, ‘The Right to the City’, *New Left Review,* September-October 2008, https://newleftreview.org/issues/II53/articles/david-harvey-the-right-to-the-city.

[^9_5]: Louis Althusser, *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings: 1978-1987*, G.M. Goshgarian, Oliver Corpet and François Matheron (eds) New York: Verso, 2006.

[^9_6]: Section 376 under Indian Penal Code is punishment for rape, which if reported by a woman - particularly after the 2011 Delhi Rape incident, the police authorities have to take immediate action against the accused

[^9_7]: AbdouMaliq Simone, ‘People as Infrastructure: Intersecting Fragments in Johannesburg’, *Public Culture*, 16.3 (2004): 407–429.

[^9_8]: Henry James, *The High Bid.*

[^9_9]: Walt Whitman, *Song of Myself,* 51.


# 10. The Shriek: A Poetic Interlude 

> A man was nothing but a continent of ideas. Whereas a woman lived on
> shifting grounds. <br/>- Katie Kitamura, *Gone to the Forest*.

A not-so-young woman lives amongst tight lanes and crowded lives.

There is nothing singular about this not-so-young woman. She is but
that, and could be anyone of them, one who lives the slumming. She is
loud. She is dirty. She has desires to be devoured, but never gently.
Living harshly, she desires it hard and harsh. She always does not say
thus; she has no tongues.

But you, from where you are, can hear her murmurs.

You enter the slums cautiously, dark, dreaded and crowded as they are;
or more confidently, if you grew up on its frail roofs. The not-so-young
woman, more often than not, cannot be slight on her feet or heavily
announce her arrival here. She rarely leaves. She imagines though, of
the sounds she has not heard, the cinemas, the metros and the rails, the
mechanical malls, and such. But also of love. The not-so-young woman
wading through the din of dens wonders, does love have a sound? Will she
know it when she hears it?

You enter the not-so-young woman always confidently, never cautiously.
You are ensconced in the hearings that always hears you, and let her
sounds wander about aimlessly. You do not even have to silence the
not-so-young woman; she is taught not to speak. She has no tongues. You
laugh, while thrusting your idiot in her. All the not-so-young-woman is
hearing is your resounding, raucous laughter and the pain in her groins.

The not-so-young woman does not know yet whether love has a sound, but
she knows now that pain does.

The not-so-young woman desperately desires the din of the dens, which on
other evenings and in-between afternoons leave her with a murderous
instinct. Where are the pathetic children? And why haven’t the ones
doused in alcohol and singing songs of a loss they have not felt,
arrived? And where is the old, farting woman, always in the corner,
always hurling obscenities? Perhaps they cannot hear her, the silently
screaming not-so-young woman reckons. And then even the silent screaming
comes to an abrupt stop: they hear her, silently.

The not-so-young woman knows now she has to find her own sound, a sound
which will silence the pain in the moment which is never-ending. The
idiot unrelenting. She agrees upon a sound which she has never heard,
that of love. She has also never been to the mountains, she has heard
that they are tall, still and never leave. The not-so-young woman hears
love as the sound of the mountain standing still.

The not-so-young woman is still hearing the sounds
of love, the tall mountains she has never visited, or have been paid a
visit by, when the idiot relents. You let it die on her when you see her
smile, but you do not hear her hearing the sounds of love. It tickles
the idiot, yet again; the not-so-young woman, the idiot reckons, wants
it.

These days the not-so-young woman, with nothing singular about her,
wades through the din of the dens like an amused child. Some even notice
her smile. She suddenly stops in the middle of taking hasty steps and
stares at the door. Often she has to be pushed out of the way because
she is staring at the pathetic children. Or letting the old, farting,
woman in corner caress her hair while hurling the obscenities.

The not-so-young woman feels the idiot in each of these sounds. Only
when the not-so-young woman can wander to the sound of the mountains
does she smile.

The nights are different though, the not-so-young woman needs the din of
the dens to wander to find the sound of love. But the not-so-young woman
has been taught to contain the cacophony brewing within, and thus white
noise becomes of her. She screams as she did, as she is taught,
silently.

But one night, the not-so-young woman’s body betrays her, and a shriek
awakens the dens.

Many-of-you appear: some in reality, others as apparitions. You ask.

The not-so-young woman, finally having an ear to her disposal, tells: of
the idiot, of the sounds, of the sound of love, of the mountains – tall,
still and never leaving, of the smile, of the idiot, yet again.

Many-of-you grimly silent at first, break into a resounding, raucous
laughter in harmony. The many-of-you perform a little demonic dance:

But you wanted it, you did. You smiled, you did. You did not shout, why
did you not, did you? If the shriek is so loud, and the pain was so bad,
how do you still live? There is a tree nearby. But, you do, you wanted
it, you did. You say, your insides hurt. Why are they still inside? Did
many-of-us pull it out? Why did you not pull them out yourself? You
wanted it, you did.

Now the not-so-young woman wanders about the lanes wearing frocks, that
many sizes too small for her, lifting it, revealing her swollen, rotting
sex, shouting and singing out of tune, but I wanted it. I did. The
many-of-you, your idiots still eager and unrelenting, throw stones at
her, demanding her to shut up.

*Coda:*

The not-so-young woman, here, is the perennial, but not the static
other. She is the woman in the slums. Slum in the city. The lower-caste,
lower-class man beaten up on a whim of a middle-class woman. The
transgendered person. The Other’s body is always an identified feminine.

The You is the City. The Violence-ordering middle-class woman. The
Hegemonic discursive space and its practices. In its perverse
masculinity, the You demands silence as a right, and practices silencing
with its desire to contain, denying a becoming and voice to the Other.

But the You, in its arrogant unhearing forgets, that on certain nights,
the not-so-young woman can and does shrieks, even if you momentarily
silence her.

In her shrieking, the sound she finally finds, the not-so-young woman
establishes she has a voice, which one fine morning, when she is not the
only, will drown: The Many-of-You.

##References
Kitamura, Katie. *Gone to the Forest,* UK Edition, Clerkenwell Press, 2013.

#Bibliography

Ahmed, Waquar. ‘Neoliberal Utopias and Urban Realities in Delhi’, *ACME:
An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies,* 10 (2011).

Attali, Jacques. *Noise: The Political Economy of Music,* Vol. 16.
Manchester University Press, 1985.

Althusser, Louis. *Philosophy of the Encounter Later Writings:
1978-1987*, translated by G.M. Goshgarian, edited by Oliver Corpet and François Matheron. New York: Verso, 2006.

Calvino, Italo. ‘A King Listens’, translated by William Weaver, in *Under the
Jaguar Sun,* pp. 31-64. San Diego, New York, London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1988.

Claus, Peter J., Sarah Diamond, and Margaret Ann Mills. *South Asian
Folklore: An Encyclopedia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka.* Taylor and Francis, 2003.

Bradbury, Ray. ‘The Fog Horn’,
https://archive.org/stream/TheFogHorn/TheFogHorn.txt.

Benjamim, Walter and Asja, *Journal de Naples*, 1925.

Borges, Jorge Luis. *Collected Fictions*, translated by Andrew Hurley. New
York: Viking, 1998.

Butler, Judith. *Gender Trouble*. London: Routledge, 1999 (1990).

Butler, Judith. *Notes* *Towards* *a* *Performative* *Theory* *of*
*Assembly.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 2015.

Certeau, Michel De. *The Practice of Everyday Life,* translated by Steven
Randall, pp. 93-105. California: University of California Press, 1984.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Listening into Others: Moralising the Soundscapes in
Delhi’, *International Development Planning Review* 34.4 (2012):
391–408.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Slum in the Time of Politics’, *Business Standard,*
21 January 2013,
https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/slum-in-the-time-of-politics-112030400055\_1.html.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Getting a Rise’, *Business Standard,* 25 January
2013,
https://www.business-standard.com/article/beyond-business/getting-a-rise-112080500044\_1.html.

Chandola, Tripta. ‘Dumped Through Technology: A Policy Maker's Guide to
Disenfranchising Slum Dwellers’, *Journal of Creative Communications*, 8.2–3 (2013): 265–275.

Classen, Constance. *Worlds of Sense: Exploring the Senses in History
and Across Cultures.* New York: Routledge, 1993.

Connor, Steven. ‘Michel Serres's Five Senses’, Birkbeck College, May
1999, http://www.stevenconnor.com/5senses.htm.

Das Gupta, Moushumi. ‘Amenities in the slums match up to urban homes’,
*Hindustan Times,* 22 March 2013,
https://www.hindustantimes.com/delhi/amenities-in-slums-match-up-to-urban-homes/story-krqsZjciIVd7pb7vsCI8iP.html.

Dean, Jodi. 'Jodi Dean - Selfie Communism', *YouTube*, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZvvH56XqCw.

Douglas, Mary. 'The Social Control of Cognition: Some Factors in Joke
Perception', *Man*, 3.3 (1968): 361–376.

Engels, Frederick. *The Housing Question*, transcribed by Zodiac, 1995 (1872),
https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1872/housing-question/.

Faiz, Ahmed Faiz. ‘Don't Ask Me for That Love Again’, translated by Agha Shahid
Ali, in *The Rebel’s Silhouette: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz,*
Amherst: Massachusetts UP, 1995, p. 5.

Ferguson, James. *The Anti-politics Machine: 'Development',
Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho.* Minnesota
UP, 1994.

Fine, Michelle. ‘Working the Hyphens’ in *Handbook of Qualitative
Research.* Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.

Foucault, Michel. *Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other
Writings, 1977-1984.* Routledge, 2013.

Gramsci, Antonio. ‘The Intellectuals’, in *Selections from the Prison
Notebooks,* translated and edited by Q. Hoare and G.N. Smith, 3-23. New York:
International Publishers, 1971.

Gentleman, Amelia. ‘Poor Lose Homes as Delhi Clean up for Games’,
*International Herald Tribute*, 2 January 2007.

Gunn, Thom. *Jamesian,*
http://psa.fcny.org/psa/poetry/poetry\_in\_motion/atlas/atlanta/jamesian/.

Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City’, *New Left Review,*
September-October 2008,
*https://newleftreview.org/issues/II53/articles/david-harvey-the-right-to-the-city.*

Marcus, George E., and Michael M.J. Fischer. *Anthropology as Cultural
Critique: An Experimental Noment in the Human Sciences*. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2014.

James, Henry. *The High Bid.*

Jha, Preeti.‘Great Wall of Kalkaji’, *Indian Express,* 5 April 2008.

Kitamura, Katie. *Gone to the Forest,* UK Edition, Clerkenwell Press,
2013.

Krejci, Jaroslav. ‘A New Model of Scientific Atheism, *Concurrence,* 1.1 (1969): 87.

Kumar, Sanjay. ‘Interpreting the AAP Win’, *The Hindu,* 11 February
2015, https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/interpreting-the-aap-win/article6879316.ece.

Lefebvre, Henri. *The Production of Space*, translated by D. Nicholson-Smith.
Oxford: Blackwell, 1991 (1974).

Li, Tania M. *The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the
Practice of Politics*. Duke University Press, 2007.

Lovink, Geert. ‘Narcissus Confirmed: Technologies of the Minimal Selfie’
in *Sad by Design: On Platform Nihilism*. Pluto Press, 2019.

Nancy, Jean-Luc. *Listening,* translated by C. Mandell. New York: Fordham,
2007.

Nigam, A. ‘Industrial Closures in Delhi’, *Revolutionary Democracy,* 7.2 (September 2001): https://www.revolutionarydemocracy.org/rdv7n2/industclos.htm.

Pandey, Ponam Chandra. ‘Sheila Dixit: Architect of Modern Delhi, Wanted
to Develop it like Singapore’, https://morningindia.in/sheila-dikshit-architect-of-modern-delhi-wanted-to-develop-it-like-singapore/.

Picard, Max. *The World of Silence,* vol. 6067, H. Regnery, 1952.

Pirandello, Luigo. ‘*Six Characters in Search of an Author’,* translated by 
John Linstrum. London: Methuen Drama, 1991.

Rancière, Jacques. *Proletarian Nights: The Workers' Dream in
Nineteenth-century France,* translated by John Durry. New York: Verso Trade,
2012.

Rice, Tom. ‘Soundselves: An Acoustemology of Sound and Self in the
Edinburgh Royal Infirmary’, *Anthropology Today*, 19.4 (2003): 4-9.

Rice, Tom. 'Govindpuri Sounds', *BBC*, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02hm1rx.

Roy, Ananya. ‘Urban Informality: Toward an Epistemology of Planning’,
*Journal of the American Planning Association*, 71 (2005): 148.

Sacks, Oliver. *Seeing Voices: A Journey into the World of the Deaf.*
Pan Macmillan, 2009.

Schafer, Murray. ‘Open Ears’, in Michael Bull and Les Back (eds) *The
auditory culture reader*, 25. New York: Berg, 2003.

Simone, AbdouMaliq. ‘People as Infrastructure: Intersecting Fragments in
Johannesburg’, *Public Culture*, 16.3 (2004): 407–429.

Soto, Hernando De. *The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in
the West and Fails Everywhere Else.* Civitas Books, 2000.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. ‘Can the Subaltern Speak?’ in C. Nelson and
L. Grossberg (eds) *Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture,* 271-315. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. ‘Scattered Speculations on the Subaltern
and the Popular’, *Postcolonial studies* 8.4 (2005): 475-486.

Stoller, P. *The Taste of Ethnographic Things: The Senses in
Anthropology.* University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.

Vishnu, Uma. ‘34% in Slums Have no Toilet, but 63% Own Mobile’, *Indian
Express*, 22 March 2013,
http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/34—in-slums-have-no-toilet-but-63--own-mobile-phone/1091573/.

Whitman, Walt. ‘Song of Myself, 51’, in D. Mckay, *Leaves of grass*,
1900.

Wikipedia Contributors, ‘India Against Corruption’, *Wikipedia,* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India\_Against\_Corruption, accessed 4 April 2020.

Zizek, Slavoj. ‘Human Rights and its Discontents: The Logic of the
Stalinist Show Trials’, Olin Auditorium, Bard College, 16 November,
1999.

Zizek, Slavoj. 'Capitalism with Asian Values', *Al Jazeera*, 13 November
2011, https://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2011/10/2011102813360731764.html.

Zizek, Slavoj. *The Pervert’s Guide to Cinema* (dir. Sophie Fiennes,
2006).

Zizek, Slavoj. *Organs without Bodies: On Deleuze and Consequences.*
London: Routledge, 2012 (2004).

